 

VAC 

ZAMBIA 

Vulnerability 

Assessment Committee 

 

LUSAKA DISTRICT RAPID FLOOD ASSESSMENT REPORT 

2010 

 

 

BY 

 

THE ZAMBIA VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE (ZVAC) 

MARCH, 2010 

LUSAKA

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

Table of contents 
 
Table of contents 

 

Acknowledgement  

 

1.0 Executive Summary  

 

 

 

2.0 Background Introduction  

3.0 Methodology  

 

4.0 Summary of Finding  

5.0 Detailed Findings  

6.0 Recommendations 

7.0 Conclusion 

Annex  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

3 

4 

5 

5 

6 

11 

27 

28 

29 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   2 

 

 

Acknowledgements 

 
The  Zambia  Vulnerability  Assessment  Committee  (ZVAC)  wishes  to  thank  the  following 
organizations for facilitating and participating in the Rapid Floods Assessment:  

•  CARE International in Zambia 
•  Catholic Relief Services (CRS) - Zambia Program  
•  Central Statistical Office (CSO) 
•  Consortium  for  Food  Security  Agriculture  Nutrition  Resilience  and  Markets 

(CFAARM) 

•  Department of Water Affairs 
•  Disaster Management and Mitigation Unit (DMMU) 
•  Zambia Meteorological Department 
•  Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives (MACO) 
•  Ward Development Committee (WDC) 
•  Lusaka District Disaster Management Committee  
•  Members of the affected Communities  

 

The  committee  further  wishes  to  thank  all  the  partners  that  financially  and  logistically 
supported the assessment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   3 

 

1.0  Executive Summary 
 
Following reports of flooding as a result of excessive rainfall received in Lusaka district; the 
Zambia  Vulnerability  Assessment  Committee  (ZVAC)  constituted  three  (3)  teams  to 
undertake a rapid assessment to ascertain the  impact of the hazard, in this case floods, in 
Lusaka  district.  The  five-day  rapid  assessment  was  undertaken  between  19th  and  23th 
March, 2010. 
 
The  overall  objective  of  the  assessment  was  to  determine  the  effects  and  extent  of  the 
floods  on  livelihoods  of  the  residents,  habitations,  infrastructure,  health,  water  and 
sanitation, education, and commercial activities in four constituencies (Chawama, Kabwata, 
Kanyama and Mandevu) which were identified as being moderately to severely affected. 
 
The assessment employed participatory approaches both at district and community levels. 
At district level, a Key Informant Interview was conducted with the Lusaka District Disaster 
Management  Committee  (DDMC).  At  community 
level,  the  assessment  employed 
community  Focus  Group  Interviews  with  wards  which  the  DDMC  identified  as  being 
moderate to severe in terms of impact of floods on the vulnerable population. 
 
From the assessment, it was established that a total of 70, 803 households were affected in 
one way or another. It was established that 63% which translates to 7,784 households have 
been  negatively  affected  by  floods  in  Kabwata  constituency,  88%  (32,586)  in  Kanyama 
Constituency, 83% translating to 18,532 households in Chawama Constituency and 43% or 
11,901 households in Mandevu Constituency.  It should be noted that this figure does not 
represent  the  number  of  people  affected  in  a  particular  sector  but  the  overall  number  of 
people  affected  in  various  aspects  (livelihood,  infrastructure  and  habitation).  The  wards 
that  were  visited  and  verified  to  be  severely  affected  were  Kabwata,  Kamwala,  Kanyama 
(Ward  10),  Harry  Mwaanga  (Ward  11),  Chawama  Ward  1  and  2,  Justin  Kabwe  and 
Ngwerere.     
 
The  negative  impact  of  floods,  ranges  from  loss  of  life  (11  and  6  deaths  in  Kanyama  and 
Mandevu  constituencies  respectively),  habitation  in  terms  of  infrastructure  becoming 
inhabitable,  limited  access  to  social  amenities  such  as  schools,  clinics  and  grocery  stores, 
erosion  of  livelihoods  and  incomes,  outbreak  of  diseases  such  as  cholera  and  malaria, 
increased  poverty  in  the  community  which  has  thus  led  to  an  increase  in  prostitution  as 
well as heightening the crime rate. 
 
The  assessment  established  that  953  housing  units  in  Kabwata  constituency  have  been 
completely  surrounded  by  water,  no  houses  were  completely  damaged  but  7  were  partly 
damaged.  In  Chawama  Constituency,  less  than  1%  of  the  houses  (at  least  203)  were 
completely damaged, 35% (7,871 houses) were partly damaged and close to 50% (10,551 
houses)  were  surrounded  by  water.  In  Mandevu  35%  (9,687)  of  the  houses  were 
surrounded  by  water,  1%  (277),  were  completely  damaged,  2%  (554)  were  partly 
damaged.  Kanyama Constituency had at least 565 houses (2%) completely damaged, 8,423 
(22%)  partly  damaged  and  just  over  70%  (27,219)  of  houses  surrounded  by  water.  No 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   4 

 

reports of households having been made shelterless or seeking shelter in public buildings 
like churches, schools and community halls. 
 
The  residents  observed  that  the  flooded  areas  will  naturally  dry  out  after  three  months, 
thus by June. 
 
It is recommended that immediately there should be an exercise to empty the septic tanks 
that are flooded. Water should be pumped out from the flooded areas. The homesteads and 
places where there are pools of stagnant water should be disinfected to reduce the spread 
of  waterborne  disease  and  breeding  of  mosquitoes.  These  measures  should  be 
accompanied  by  community  sensitisation  by  the  health  personnel.  In  the  medium  term, 
main  roads  should  be  rehabilitated.  Opening up  of  blocked  culverts  and drainages  should 
be a priority as this will greatly help to allow for the free flow of water. In the long run, the 
roads should be worked on and where possible tarred and construction of main drainage 
system to receive water from the sub drainages should be constructed or cleared. 
  
2.0 Background Introduction 
 
Following reports of floods as a result of heavy rainfall that was experienced particularly in 
February,  the  Disaster  Management  and  Mitigation  Unit  (DMMU)  constituted  three  teams 
to undertake a rapid assessment to ascertain the impact of floods in three constituencies in 
Lusaka District, from 19th to 23rd March 2010. 
 
2.1 Overall Objective  
The  overall  objective  was  to  determine  the  effects  and  extent  of  the  floods  on  the 
livelihood,  habitants  and  habitation,  infrastructure,  water  and  health  of  the  vulnerable 
population. 
 
 
 
2.2 Specific Objectives  

a)  To determine the extent to which floods impacted different infrastructure (houses, 

clinics, schools, bridges and roads) 

b)  To determine the impact on the livelihood and income sources at household level 

 
3.0 Methodology 
 
3.1 Data Collection  
A district discussion was conducted with the District Disaster Management Committee. Out 
of  the  seven  constituencies  in  Lusaka  district,  the  DDMC  identified  four  (Kabwata, 
Mandevu,  Kanyama  and  Chawama)  as  being  moderately  to  severely  affected.  The  team 
triangulated the district responses with constituencies by conducting interviews (Focused 
Group  Discussion)  at  ward  level  in  the  respective  constituencies.  The  FGD  constituted  of 
members  that  included  Ward  Councilors,  Ward  Development  Committee  Chairpersons, 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   5 

 

ordinary residents, and other professionals like teachers. The number ranged from four to 
twenty but the average was twelve.  
 
Most of the data collected was primary and was both qualitative and quantitative in nature. 
 
3.2 Limitations 

1)  Though  the  community  leaders  were  cooperative,  they  lacked  total  essence  of  the 

exercise because the exercise was of an emergency nature. 

2)  There were logistical challenges in terms of transport of the teams during the field 

visit considering the bad state of the roads 

3)  The fact that it was sometimes raining, access to certain areas was restricted 
4)  Some  communities  pointed  out  that  it  was  abrupt  for  them  to  provide  accurate 
information  because  there  were  not  given  the  prior  interview  guide/  questions. 
Some information needed to have been researched on before the meeting 

 Livelihood  

 
 
 
4.0 Summary of Findings 
 
The general findings of the assessment are summarized as follows: 
 
4.1 Kabwata Constituency  
4.1.1 
The  assessed  wards  in  Kabwata  have  urban-based  livelihoods.  The  common  livelihood 
sources  for  most  of  the  communities  were  found  to  be  formal  employment,  petty  trading 
(tuntemba), small and medium business, rentals and pension. The assessment established 
that the flooding had a 64% impact on the livelihoods of the people. 
 
4.1.2  Loss of Human Life 
The assessment established there was no loss of human life in Kabwata constituency. 
 
4.1.3 
In  Kabwata  constituency,  up  to  80%  of  the  road  infrastructure  has  been  extensively 
damaged  as  a  result  of  the  floods  making  it  very  difficult  to  move  from  one  point  to  the 
other for both pedestrians and motorists. 
 
The  area  reported  that  7  houses  have  been  partly  damaged  and  no  house  was  reported 
completely  damaged  but  953  housing  units  have  been  surrounded  by  water.  Schools  and 
health  centers  have  been  less  affected  in  terms  of  infrastructure  damage  but  the  roads 
leading  to  these  facilities  have  been  badly  damaged  and  the  premises  are  surrounded  by 
stagnant water. Other infrastructures such as churches and office buildings are still intact 
but are mostly surrounded by stagnant water. 
 
 
 

Infrastructure 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   6 

 

4.1.4  Education 
The  assessment  revealed  that  there  was  reduced  accessibility  to  schools  due  to  damaged 
and  poor  state  of  roads,  presence  of  pools  and  running water  within  the  school  premises 
and along the roads, a situation which resulted in increased absenteeism at most schools. 
One school (Palma) was temporally closed in late February and early March but there was 
no disruption to the school calendar with other schools.  
 
4.1.5  Health 
Due  to  the  deteriorating  standards  in  terms  of  environmental  health,  the  constituency  is 
anticipating a likelihood of experiencing incidences of water and non waterborne diseases 
such as diarrhea, dysentery and cholera and malaria. At the time of assessment, no diseases 
were officially reported. 

 
4.1.6  Water and Sanitation 
Most  of  the  houses  that  were  surrounded  by  water  had  a  combination  of  both  rain  and 
sewer water because the septic tanks were flooded. This is a big health hazard as some of 
this  contaminated  water  seeped  through  the  pipes  that  supplied  drinking  water.  Such 
homesteads  indicated  that  their  drinking    water  was  susceptible  to  the  threat  of 
contamination of feacal matter or other debris.  

4.1.7  Human Settlement and Shelter 
Fortunate enough there was no case were the houses were completely damaged but 7 were 
reported to have been partly damaged and the damage was attributed to the floods which 
weakened the housing structures. The occupants are  still occupying the same houses that 
have  been  partly  damaged.  However,  302  families,  mostly  tenants,  have  voluntary  moved 
out of the houses because of the flooded homesteads.  

 

No  reports  of  households  having  been  made  shelterless  or  seeking  shelter  in  public 
buildings such as churches, schools and community halls. 

 

4.1.8  Coping strategies  
Kabwata constituency residents are coping up with the situation by putting filled sandbags 
as  a  way  of  making  walkways  and  blocking  water  from  entering  their  homesteads.  The 
community  is  also  making  and  clearing  minor  drainages  to  allow  water  to  flow.  Most 
mothers  and  grandmothers  are  carrying  school  going  children  on  their  backs.  Those 
households that are completely surrounded by water are spraying and or sprinkling oil or 
diesel  to  reduce  the  breeding  of  mosquitoes.  In  some  cases,  individual  efforts  are  being 
made to empty septic tanks and continuously mop water out of the houses. 
 
4.1.9  Community Preparedness, Response and Monitoring Plans 
Prior  to  the onset  of  the  rains,  the  community mobilised  road  material  (gravel)  but  these 
efforts on road works were hampered by lack of technical expertise to supervise the works 
coupled with the rapid onset of rains whose intensity was high. However, the community 
plans to get on-site and work on the drainages and roads immediately the rains are over. As 
a preparedness strategy, the community embarked on clearing of drainages in partnership 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   7 

 

with Lusaka City Council. The weakness on the part of the community is that they were no 
measures  that  where  put  in  place  to  monitor  all  these  efforts  that  are  being  put  in  place 
apart  from  Libala  ward  were  the  Ward  Development  Committee  visit  the  areas  on  a 
monthly basis. 
 
 
 
4.1.10  Community Proposed Mitigation measures- Recommendations 
In  order  to  mitigate  the  effect  of  the  floods  in  the  short  run,  the  community  is  proposing 
that septic tanks that are flooded be emptied. Pumps should be placed to assist in pumping 
water from the flooded areas. The homesteads and where there are pools of stagnant water 
should  be  disinfected  to  reduce  the  spread  of  waterborne  disease  and  breeding  of 
mosquitoes.  
 
In  the  medium  term,  main  roads  should  be  rehabilitated.  Opening  up  of  blocked  culverts 
and  drainages  should  be  a  priority  as  this  will  greatly  help  to  allow  for  the  free  flow  of 
water. 
 
In the long run, the roads should be worked on and where possible tarred and construction 
of main drainage system to receive water from the sub drainages should be constructed or 
cleared. The WDCs have reported to the council for action on those houses that have been 
“wrongly” built like on drainages. 
 
4.2 Chawama Constituency 
4.2.1 Livelihood 
The  main  livelihood  sources  in  this  constituency  are  trading,  formal  employment,  piece 
work and quarrying. The average impact floods have caused on livelihood sources is 65%. 
 
4.2.2 Loss of Human Life 
There has not been any deaths recorded as a result of flooding.  
 
4.2.3 Infrastructure 
95%  of  all  the  roads  in  Chawama  constituency  had  significant  pools  of  water  sitting  on 
them  especially  in  Kuku  compound  and  Koumboka  area.  Others  included  Dziko  Nibantu, 
Nyerere,  Swazi  and  Katambalala  roads.  5  churches  have  been  surrounded  by  water.    One 
church  (Jesus  the  King  Ministry)  and  the  Ward  Development  Committee  Office  in  ward  2 
were both surrounded by water. 
 
4.2.4 Education 
Three schools in Chawama were surrounded by water these being Chimwemwe, Chawama 
and  Twatasha  Basic  schools.    Although  the  schools  did  not  have  to  close  because  of  the 
floods,  absenteeism  has  increased  as  school  children  sometimes  cannot  manage  to  wade 
through the water especially after a heavy downpour, this has caused the general average 
performance in schools to reduce. 
  
 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   8 

 

4.2.5 Health 
Floods  have  caused  outbreak  of  water  borne  diseases  like  cholera.  So  far  78  cases  of 
cholera  have  been  recorded  at  Chawama  Health  Centre  as  of  19th  March,  2010.  Chawama 
Health Centre is the only clinic in this area is partly surrounded by water.  
 
4.2.6 Water and Sanitation 
Most  of  the  toilets  have  been  damaged  or  flooded  hence  people  are  using  shake-shake 
packs  to  relieve  themselves  and  then  throw  the  excreta  into  the  water.    This  is  a  serious 
health hazard. 
 
4.2.7 Human Settlement and Shelter 
In  Chawama  Constituency,  less  than  1%  of  the  houses  (at  least  203)  were  completely 
damaged,  35%  (7,871  houses)  were  partly  damaged  and  close  to  50%  (10,551  houses) 
were surrounded by water. The residents observed that the flooded areas will naturally dry 
out after three months, thus by June. No reports on shelterless families or seeking shelter in 
public buildings like school, churches and community halls.   
 
4.2.8 Coping strategies 
Children  and  in  some  cases  whole  families  are  sleeping  on  table  tops  in  order  not  to  get 
wet. Furniture is elevated using bricks to avoid them from getting wet. In addition they put 
sand bags to block water from entering the homestead. Those who are able to afford have 
bought protective clothing like gumboots. 
 
4.2.9 Community Preparedness, Response and Monitoring Plans 
Before  the  onset  of  the  rains  the  exercise  of  unblocking  drainages  as  well  as  placing  of 
sandbags  in  areas  most  susceptible  to  floods  (though  these  were  washed  away  by  floods 
when  the  rains  began)  was  being  done.  The  WDC  was  making  follow-ups  on  these  small 
mostly individual efforts of interventions. 
 
With the onset of the rains and the subsequent flooding, the community has involved other 
stakeholders  such  as  the  Natsave  bank,  Spar  Supermarket  and  individuals  to  clear  the 
drainages. The office of the District Commissioner has also provided prisoners to clean up 
in two wards of this constituency. 
 
4.2.10 Community Proposed Mitigation measures- Recommendations 
In the short term, the communities in Chawama Constituency would like mobile toilets to 
be  provided,  the  worst  affected  families  to  be  relocated,  chlorine  to  be  provided  for 
drinking water as also points where people get clean water to be increased.  In the medium 
term,  a  big  main  drainage  needs  to  be  made;  roads  need  to  be  upgraded  as  well  as  the 
settlement needs to be upgraded.   
 
4.3.0 Kanyama Constituency 
4.3.1 Livelihood  
Most  of  the  residents  of  Kanyama  constituency  are  traders  dealing  in  small  items  like 
vegetables.  Vending in edible commodities like groundnuts is also a very common form of 
trading as well as the running of stalls like payphones and what is commonly referred to as 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   9 

 

tuntemba  (petty  trade).  Other  income  sources  in  this  constituency  are  quarrying  or  stone 
breaking as well as brewing and selling of beer.  On average, there floods had 60% impact 
on the livelihoods of the residents. 
 
 
4.3.2 Loss of Human Life 
In  Kanyama  constituency,  at  least  11  cases  of  death  were  said  to  have  been  recorded.  
These  deaths  were  as  a  result  of  drowning  in  manholes  that  were  flooded  hence  people 
stepped in them without knowing their depths.   
 
 
4.3.3 Infrastructure 
Kanyama  Constituency  had  at  least  565  houses  (2%)  completely  damaged,  8,423  (22%) 
partly damaged and just over 70% (27,219) of houses surrounded by water.  Two clinics in 
this constituency were surrounded by water while 5 schools had the same experience. Most 
of  the  roads  have  either  been  partly  or  completely  damaged  and  have  been,  at  times, 
impassable. 
 
4.3.4 Education 
This  year,  there  were  no  schools  that  closed  due  to  the  floods.    However  there  were 
instances  where  children  have  been  sent  away  for  the  day  when  the  school  was  flooded 
after heavy rains. Also due to the reported death of a school girl in Ward 10, parents are a 
bit apprehensive to send their children to school when the floodwaters are high. 
  
4.3.5 Health 
The  floods  have  brought  about  a  number  of  health  problems.    This  constituency  is  very 
vulnerable  to  cholera hence  with  floods  like  these  there  has  been  cholera  cases  that  have 
been reported.  The stagnant water has become a breeding ground for mosquitoes leading 
to cases of malaria being on the increase.  Also people have developed sores on their feet as 
they have to wade in the water. 
 
The rise in poverty levels has also brought in other issues; prostitution has increased.  This 
increase in prostitution is feared to cause an increase in HIV in the community. 
 
4.3.6 Water and Sanitation 
There  is  lack  of  access  to  clean  water  as  the  shallow  wells  are  submerged  and  the  water 
there has mixed with sewage from the flooded pit latrines.  In some places there is no piped 
water and communities are solely reliant on shallow wells. 
 
4.3.7 Coping strategies 
In order to cope with these floods, the majority of the people of Kanyama constituency have 
bought gumboots to protect their feet as they wade through the floodwater.  In the houses 
that are surrounded by the floodwater, people have placed sand bags in order to block the 
water from entering their homes.  However in most cases this has not deterred the water 
from entering the homes and in such cases some families have had to abandon their homes 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   10

 

and have relocated.  Those that have not relocated have just elevated their furniture so that 
it doesn’t get wet and placed blocks or planks to step on. 
 
4.3.8 Community Preparedness, Response and Monitoring Plans 
Prior to the rains the community was involved in a number of projects in preparation for 
the  coming  of  the  rains.    These  included  unblocking  of  drainages,  solid  waste  removal, 
cleaning  of  schools  and  markets  as  well  as  distribution  of  chlorine.  About  9.8  Billion 
Kwacha was allocated to Kanyama for drainage clearance and construction in partnership 
with CARE International in Zambia.   
 
There  was  close  monitoring  of  all  the  community  projects  by  the  WDC  which  was 
supervising  the  progress  of  these  projects.  The  council  was  in  charge  of  monitoring  the 
progress of the drainage clearance and for 9.8 Billion Kwacha. 
 
4.8.9 Community Proposed mitigation measures- Recommendations 
The  community  would  like  in  the  short  term;  portable  toilets  to  be  provided,  the  worst 
affected families to be relocated, the  stagnant  water to be disinfected  and pumping out of 
the flood water.   
 
Measures  for  the  medium  term  are  to  build  clinics  for  each  ward  at  least,  commence  in 
construction of a proper drainage system, increase access to drinking water by increasing 
the  number  of  taps  in  the  area  and  using  high  grade  gravel  on  the  roads  when  grading 
them.   
 
In  the  long  term,  the  community  would  like  schools  to  be  constructed,  giving  of  plots  be 
done  in  a  planned  manner,  the  roads  be  raised  and  upgraded  to  tarmac  in  some  cases, 
construction of a school for each ward. 
 
5.0 Detailed Findings 
 
5.1 Kabwata Constituency 
 5.1.1Kamwala (Ward 5) 
Livelihood 
Most  of  the  residents  of  Kamwala  ward  are  retirees  who  depend  on  monthly  pension 
schemes  and  rentals  from  their  own  houses  for  their  livelihood.  Others  are  in  formal 
employment  and  the  rest  do  some  form  of  business  or  trading.  In  terms  of  impact  on  the 
respective  sources  of  livelihoods,  the  floods  impacted  95%  on  retirees,  80%  on  business 
people and 70% on those that are formally employed. 
 
Effect of flood on the vulnerable community  
The  flooding  was  described  severe  affecting  close  to  90%  (4,321)  of  the  households.  The 
flood situation has been bad in the last three consecutive years, having the current one as 
the worst. The hazard first struck around end of November (heavy downpour) but this was 
followed by a dry spell and by the first week of February, the situation got worse because 
the area received continuous rains for almost a week.  

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   11

 

 
The most affected are the housing units along the Chilenje-Matero commuter train railway 
line,  those  behind  Kamwala  High  School,  ASA  farm  and  Zipas  School.  About  407  houses 
have  been  affected  out  which  7  (less  than  1%)  are  partly  damaged,  400  (8%)  are 
surrounded  by  water  but  no  house  was  reported  completely  damaged.  At  the  time  of  the 
assessment,  two  schools,  Zipas  and  Nizar  were  surrounded  by  water  but  the  structures 
were still intact. Close to 70% of the roads were damaged especially the one from St Patrick 
to  Zipas  school  and  behind  Kamwala  High  school  near  Deeper  Life  Church.  Seven  out  of 
eight Churches have been surrounded by water. 
 
There  has  been  no  report  of  households  being  integrated,  or  being  shelterless  or  seeking 
refuge  in  public  shelters  like  churches  and  schools.  Currently  all  the  households  are  still 
occupying  their  homestead  apart  from  one  household  which  reported  that  part  of  the 
family has relocated and another one has completely relocated to rent elsewhere  
 
The  floods  have  negatively  affected  the  livelihood  of  this  community  in  that  business 
earnings  (incomes)  have  been  reduced  negatively,  the  residents  are  facing  significant 
challenges  in  terms  of  moving  (both  motorists  and  pedestrians),  septic  tanks  have  been 
flooded  thereby  creating  a  health  hazard  environment.  There  has  been  some  social  life 
effects  where  neighbours  have  picked  up  quarrels  as  a  result  of  blocking  and  or  opening 
flow of water resulting in flows or backflows to the next door neighbour’s homestead. 
 
Coping strategies  
The residents in Kamwala are coping up with the situation by putting filled sandbags as a 
way of making walkways and blocking water. The community is also making and clearing 
minor  drainages  to  allow  water  to  flow.  Most  mothers  and  grandmothers  are  carrying 
school going children on their backs. In those households that are completely surrounded 
by water, the residents are spraying and or sprinkling oil or diesel to reduce the breeding 
of mosquitoes. 
 
Community Preparedness, Response and Monitoring Plans 
Prior to the onset of the rains, the community mobilised road material (gravel) but lacked 
technical  expertise  to  supervise  the  works.  This  resulted  in  a  poor  job  done  and  further 
works on the roads were jeopardised by the rapid onset of rains whose intensity was high. 
With  limited  technical  know-how,  the  community  did  not  put  in  place  any  monitoring 
measures.  However,  the  community  plans  to  get  on  site  and  work  on  the  drainages  and 
roads immediately the rains are over. Fortunate enough funds have been  secured to clear 
the drainages.  
 
As an external repose measure, DMMU is currently pumping water from Kabwata Site and 
Service throwing water to Kamwala south but the capacity of the pump is not able to cope 
with the rate of water accumulation. 
 
Community Proposed Mitigation measures- Recommendations 
The  community  is  proposing  that  the  area  should  be  immediately  sprayed/  disinfected 
especially  the  water  logged  areas,  the  flooded  septic  tanks  to  be  emptied  to  reduce  the 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   12

 

overflow  of  human  excreta  and  the  blocked  drainages  and  culverts  to  be  cleared.  In  the 
medium term, the roads and drainages should be well attended to under the supervision of 
technical staff. Concrete drainages should be created to allow free water flow.  
 
5.1.2 Kabwata (Ward 6) 
Livelihood 
The  main  livelihood  of  the  residents  is  business  trading,  followed  by  formal  employment 
and the rest are retires. In terms of impact on the respective livelihoods, the floods have a 
75%  impact  on  those  who  are  doing  business  or  trading,  a  similar  magnitude  of  75%  on 
formally employed residents and a 70% impact on retirees. 
 
Effect of flood on the vulnerable community  
The  effect  of  the  floods  has  been  described  as  being  severe  at  the  time  of  occurrence 
affecting close to 90% or approximately 3,290 households. The floods were first reported 
in  mid  January.  No  reports  on  residential  houses  having  being  partly  or  completely 
damaged  but  there  were  548  (15%)  houses  reported  to  have  been  surrounded  by  water. 
The only clinic in the ward is intact but the road leading to the clinic is in a bad state. Two 
schools (Kabwata basic and Palmer) have been partly damaged and surrounded by water. 
About  70%  of  the  roads  have  been  damaged.  Two  churches  (ZAOGA  and  Deeper  life)  are 
surrounded by water and hence, no service is being conducted. 
 
No  reports  on  households  that  have  been  affected  are  being  integrated  neither  are  they 
shelterless because no house was reported completely damaged. Therefore all the families 
are occupying the same houses; however 600 (16%) tenants have opted to rent elsewhere. 
No  households  have  sought  refuge  in  schools  or  churches  but  200  (6%)  have  voluntarily 
relocated to other areas and 100 (3%) landlords have been compelled to renting elsewhere 
within and outside the ward. 
 
The residents have suffered emotional stress seeing their way of living reducing in terms of 
sanitation,  household  goods  being  soaked  by  water  and  their  incomes  being  affected 
negatively.  Peoples’  household  budgets  have  unexpectedly  increased  to  cover  expenses 
such as frequent repairs to the vehicles, making private arrangement to remove water from 
homes  or  emptying  septic  tanks.  The  floods  had  a  negative  impact  on  the  education  of 
school  going  children  as  they  have  to  wade  in  water  before  reporting  to  school  or 
occasionally reported absenteeism. 
 
Coping strategies  
The community have embarked on emptying septic tanks, moping water from the houses, 
bought protective clothing like gum boots and carrying school going children on the back of 
mothers/ grandmothers. 
 
Community Preparedness, Response and Monitoring Plans 
As a preparedness strategy, the community embarked on clearing of drainages which was 
done  in  partnership  with  Lusaka  City  Council.  However,  there  were  no  monitoring 
measures that were put in place. In response to the floods, the residents have reported to 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   13

 

relevant offices e.g. the District Commissioner, the Area Member of Parliament and Lusaka 
City Council.  
 
Community Proposed Mitigation measures- Recommendations 
In  order  to  mitigate  the  effect  of  the  floods  in  the  short  run,  the  community  is  proposing 
that septic tanks that are flooded should be emptied. Pumps should be placed to assist in 
pumping of water from the flooded areas, disinfecting stagnant water to reduce the spread 
of waterborne disease and breeding of mosquitoes. In the medium term, main roads should 
be rehabilitated; opening up of blocked culverts and drainages will greatly help to allow for 
the free flow of water. In the long run, the roads should be tarred and construction of main 
drainage system to receive water from the sub drainages should be done 
 
5.1.3 Libala (Ward 7) 
Livelihood 
The  livelihood  source  of  most  of  the  residents  in  Libala  ward  is  through  formal 
employment, seconded by those who are doing some sort of trading (business) and the rest 
are  retired  but  earn  a  leaving  through  pension  scheme.  The  flood’s  effect  on  the  formally 
employed is 40% while on those conducting business has been 40% and a 30% impact on 
retirees.   
 
Effect of flood on the vulnerable community  
Generally  the  residents  reported  that  despite  the  hazard  being  of  high  intensity  when  it 
first  occurred  in  the  first  week  of  February,  the  impact  on  the  vulnerable  population  was 
described  as  low  and  estimated  to  being  close  to  10%.  The  wet  situation  continued  from 
February  when  it  was  first  observed  and  spread  through  March.  When  compared  to  the 
past five years, the trend of high rainfall impacting on people’s livelihood has been similar 
but this year’s has  been the worst in the five-year reference period. The current situation 
may lead into a possibility of outbreak of cholera and malaria but at the time of reporting, 
the situation did not show signs of such diseases occurring. 
 
No  reports  of  houses  that  are  partly  or  complete  damaged  but  5  houses  (less  than  1%) 
reported to be surrounded by water. The most affected housing units are the ones close to 
the  commuter  train  railway  line  bordering  Libala  South  residential  area.  No  reports  on 
clinics,  schools  or  any  other  infrastructure.  However  80%  of  the  roads  have  been  partly 
damaged  especially  the  Nationalist  Rd  extension,  Yotam  Muleya  and  the  one  bordering 
Libala and Chilenje. The assessment reviewed that about 10% of the roads were complete 
damaged. The greater effect was seen on those roads that have never been tarred before 
 
All  the  residents  are  occupying  the  same  houses  and  no  households  have  been  rendered 
shelter  less  neither  are  they  staying  in  public  buildings  like  schools,  churches  and 
community halls. 
 
Community Preparedness, Response and Monitoring Plans 
The  Ward  Development  Committee  filed  in  a  report  to  Lusaka  City  Council  about  houses 
that  are  “wrongly”  built  on  drainages  so  that  an  action  could  be  taken.  The  Ward 
Development  Committee  is  in  the  process  of  engaging  a  contractor  to  work  on  the  roads 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   14

 

and  drainages.  They  have  also  put  in  place  measure  to  monitor  the  development  works 
once a month.   
 
 
Community Proposed Mitigation measures- Recommendations 
The community is proposing that the roads and drainages should be worked on e.g. tarring 
the  roads.  There  should  be  an  ongoing  and  consistent  road  maintenance  programme. 
Culverts should be unblocked and the drainages should be cleared.  
 
 
5.2 Chawama constituency 
5.2.1 Chawama (Ward 2) 
Livelihood 
The  livelihood  is  mainly  informal  employment  (petty  trading),  seconded  by  formal 
employment  and  lastly  unemployed  (piece  work).  The  flood’s  effect  on  the  informal 
employment was 60%, while the formal employment was 65% and on the unemployed was 
60%. 
 
 
Effect of flood on the vulnerable community  
The overall effect of the floods on the vulnerable population was severe (70%). The flood 
problem was noticed in mid February and it has been on through March. When compared 
to  the  last  five  years,  the  impact  was  minimal  in  2008/9  but  was  highest  this  year.  The 
assessment  recorded  13  (less  than  1%)  houses  were  partly  damaged,  no  house  was 
completely damaged but the area had 600 (5%) houses surrounded by water especially in 
Koumboka  area.  Other  effects  of  the  excessive  water  lead  to  some  pit  latrines  collapsing. 
The  only  clinic  (Chawama  Health  Centre)  in  the  ward  is  surrounded  by  water  and  three 
schools  are  also  surrounded  by  water  these  being  Chimwemwe,  Chawama  and  Twatasha 
Basic schools.  
 
17 roads are partly damaged while one is completely damaged.  Significant pools of water 
were  sitting  on  the  roads  especially  in  Kuku  compound  and  Koumboka  area.  One  church 
(Jesus  the  King  Ministry)  and  the  Ward  Development  Committee  Office  were  both 
surrounded by water. 
 
Two families were integrated while the 13 families whose houses were partly damaged are 
still occupying the same houses and no reports of households seeking refuge in schools or 
churches.  However  there  are  two  families  that  have  voluntarily  relocated  and  100  (less 
than 1%) are renting elsewhere. 
 
In  addition,  the  floods  have  caused  outbreak  of  water  borne  diseases  like  cholera.  The 
respondents linked the 78 cases of cholera which were recorded at Chawama Health Centre 
to the problem of floods. The quality of drinking water has been affected due to leakages in 
water pipes, the road network has been damaged, toilets are flooding and others collapsing. 
 
Coping strategies  

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   15

 

As a coping strategy the residents of Chawama Ward 2 have resorted to asking assistance 
from  neighbours  and  public  social  places  (bars)  for  toilet  usage,  some  have  resulted  in 
using  “flying  toilets”  plastic  and  shake  shake  packs.  Affected  residents  have  opted  to  fill 
bags with sand to block the flow of water into the homesteads.  
 
Community Preparedness, Response and Monitoring Plans 
The  community  embarked  on  clearing  drainages  using  community  contributions.  With 
regards  to  monitoring  measure,  the  WDC  regularly  visit  the  area.  As  a  response  to  the 
problem,  the  community  has  involved  other  stakeholders  such  as  the  Natsave  bank,  Spar 
Supermarket and individuals to clear the drainages. The office of the District Commissioner 
has send prisoners to clean up the ward. 
 
Community Proposed Mitigation measures- Recommendations 
The  community  proposed  that  in  the  short  term,  unblocking  the  main  drainages  and 
opening up culverts may assist in that water from the water logged areas will start flowing 
freely. The other suggestion was to pump away stagnant water. Since the problem of toilets 
is  quite  big,  the  residents  are  requesting  for  mobile  toilets  to  be  provided.    Chlorine  has 
been suggested to treat drinking water. 
 
In the medium term, the ward intends to put culverts and has already taken an inventory of 
the quantity needed totalling 42. 
 
In  the  long  term,  there  should  be  proper  planning  of  housing  units  before  actual 
construction  and  proper  supervision  during  construction.  The  roads  should  be  tarred  as 
gravel is not a long term solution. The area has a lot of rock which block the free water flow 
and so it was proposed that blasting of the rocks will pave way for water. 
 
5.2.2 Chawama Nkoloma Ward 1 
Livelihood 
The major source of livelihood in Chawama Ward 1 is trading which can either be general 
trading  or  vending.    The  second  most  common  form  livelihood  is  quarrying  or  stone 
breaking  followed  by  those  that  are  in  formal  employment  and  then  lastly  those  that  do 
welding.   
 
In  terms  of  the  level  of  impact  of  the  floods  on  the  different  livelihoods  trading  was  70% 
impacted as most of the places of business were flooded. Quarrying was impacted by about 
60%  as  the  places  where  they  get  the  rocks  have  been  flooded.      The  formally  employed 
haven’t been affected so much except in their movement to their work places as the roads 
are flooded.  Lastly those who are welders have experienced about 60% as their places of 
business have also been flooded. 
 
Effect of flood on the vulnerable community 
Approximately  95%  of  the  households  in  this  ward  (at  least  9,954households)  were 
affected  by  the  floods.    These  floods  struck  in February  2010  and  were  said  to  be  severe.  
The community’s experience in terms of the flood situation in this area in the past 5 years 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   16

 

is that flooding is an annual occurrence in this area however, this year it has been worse. 
This  year’s  flooding  has  resulted  in  communities  lacking  access  to  safe  drinking  water 
forcing  the  residents  to  move  long  distances  to  get  clean  water.    Movement  has  been 
hampered  as  almost  all  the  roads  in  this  community  are  flooded;  as  a  result  people  have 
developed  sores  on  their  feet  as  they  are  constantly  wading  through  the  stagnant  water. 
The flooding of the roads in this ward has caused school children to at times be unable to 
go to school when the flooding has been very high. The flooding has cause a loss of business 
for the traders (trading is the most common livelihood and income source). This has in turn 
caused the poverty levels in the community to increase.  Malaria has also now increased as 
mosquitoes  have  increased  in  number  since  the  stagnant  water  has  become  breeding 
ground for them. 
 
In  terms  of  infrastructure  damage,  about  7,858  houses  have  been  partly  damaged,  203 
houses completely damaged with at least 9,951 houses surrounded by water. There are no 
clinics and bridges in this area. 95% of all the  roads are completely surrounded in water; 
these  include  Dziko  Nibantu,  Nyerere,  Swazi  and  Katambalala  roads.  Four  churches  have 
been surrounded by water and these are Redeemed church, Baptist church, Apostolic and 
CCAP Pentecostal churches. 4 markets have also been surrounded by water and these are; 
Katwishi,  Chuma  Chienda,  Katambalala  and  David  Kaunda  Markets.  There  are  150 
households  that  have  been  integrated  in  the  community  while  200  have  been  left 
shelterless.  825  households  are  still  occupying  the  same  damaged  houses  and  as  at  22nd 
March,  2010  when  the  interviews  were  conducted,  about  136  households  had  been 
relocated.  At least 1,520 households had since moved and were now renting elsewhere. 
 
Coping strategies 
In order to cope with the floods in this ward, people have been putting sand bags so as to 
block  water  from  entering  their  yards.  More  people  have  bought  gumboots  which  they 
wear  as  they  wade  through  the  stagnant  water.    Because  most  of  the  toilets  in  these 
households have been flooded, people are now going to taverns to make use of the toilets 
there,  in  some  cases  when  pressed,  people  are  now  using  Shake-Shake  packs  to  relieve 
themselves.    These  packs  are  then  thrown  back  into  the  stagnant  water  causing  a  serious 
health hazard.  In those houses where water has entered, people are elevating furniture so 
as  not  to  get  wet.  Children  and  in  some  cases  whole  family  are  sleeping  on  table  tops  in 
order not to get wet 
 
Proposed mitigation and response measures  
In  the  short  term,  communities  would  like  to  see  those  families  hardest  hit  by  the  floods 
relocated  to  dry  land.  These  families  especially  those  with  small  children  should  also  be 
provided  with  relief  food.  There  should  be  more  points  where  people  can  access  clean 
water  from  the  current  four  points.    Mobile  toilets  should  be  provided  since  most  of  the 
toilets in this community have been flooded. The pumping out of the collected water should 
be done starting with the market places.  The stagnant water should be disinfected so that 
breeding of mosquitoes is reduced. At the same time mosquito nets should be provided to 
the  community.    Additionally,  communities  should  be  given  chlorine  to  put  in  drinking 
water. 
 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   17

 

In the medium term, commencement of construction of good roads should begin together 
with  the  construction  of  a  proper  drainage  system  for  this  area.    The  community  should 
also  like  to  have  more  communal  taps  put  around  the  ward  as  well  as  proper  flushing 
toilets constructed for them. 
Long  term  measures  include  the  upgrading  of  the  settlement  together  with  the  Ward 
Development Offices. Construction of a school, clinic and police post is proposed as a long 
term goal.  People quarrying this area should be stopped. 
 
Community Preparedness, Response and Monitoring 
Generally  there  was  no  official  project  that  was  going  on  before  the  onset  of  the  rains.  
There  was,  to  a  very  small  extent  though,  the  exercise  of  unblocking  drainages  as  well  as 
placing of sandbags in areas most susceptible to floods though these were washed away by 
floods  when  the  rains  began.  The  WDC  was  making  follow-ups  on  these  small  mostly 
individual efforts of interventions.  
 
5.3 Kanyama Constituency 
5.3.1 Old Kanyama Ward 10 
Livelihood 
Most  of  the  residents  of  Kanyama  Ward  10  are  traders  dealing  in  small  items  like 
vegetables.  Vending in edible commodities like groundnuts also falls under this category of 
trading as does the running of stalls like payphones and what is commonly referred to as 
tuntemba.  The second most common livelihood source is the brewing of beer, mostly illicit 
beer like kachasu.  The third livelihood source is quarrying and stone crushing.  An activity 
that fell closely behind this third one was block-making. 
 
In terms of the level of impact that the floods have caused these main livelihood sources in 
this ward is; trading has been impacted by approximately 70% while beer brewing hasn’t 
really been affected that much but only about 10% as people are still drinking despite the 
floods.  Stone  crushing  has  had  an  almost  100%  impact  as  the  area  where  people  get  the 
stones as well as where they sell the crushed stones are completely flooded.  Lastly block-
making  has  been  85%  impacted  due  to  areas  of  business  being  flooded  and  the  fact  that 
people do not want to buy wet/damp blocks as this compromise the structure being built. 
 
Effect of flood on the vulnerable community  
This  year’s  flooding was  described  as  severe  in  this  area,  affecting  close  to  90% of  all  the 
households in this ward bringing the number of households affects to at least 15,775.  The 
floods were reported to have struck in February of this year, and rated as the worst so far 
in comparison to the previous five years. 
 
The floods have brought about cholera in this area as well as increased cases of malaria as 
the  flooded  water  is  breeding  ground  for  the  mosquitoes.  Poverty  levels  have  also 
increased as the floods have disrupted livelihood and income sources for the people in this 
ward.    This  is  because  most  places  of  business  are  surrounded  by  water.    The  rise  in 
poverty levels has also brought in other issues; prostitution has increased.  This increase in 
prostitution is feared to cause an increase in HIV in the community. Crime rate in this area 
has now also increased as it is a direct effect of the rise in poverty levels. People have also 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   18

 

developed sores on the legs as they wade in the floodwater when moving from one point to 
the  other.  There  are  deaths  that  have  been  reported  due  to  drowning  in  the  floodwaters. 
This  area  has  a  number  of  manholes  and  quarry  pits.  However,  due  to  the  heavy  rains, 
these  ditches  have  also  been  flooded  hence  people  step  in  them  without  knowing  their 
depths  and  have  died  in  some  cases  (1  girl  is  said  to  have  drowned  in  a  manhole).    The 
community  has  also  been  infested  with  rodents  like  rats  and  also  cockroaches  have 
increased in the houses. 
 
The most affected in terms of infrastructure damage in this area has been the houses with 
at least 2,078 housing units partly damaged, 450 completely damaged and  approximately 
11,800 housing units surrounded by water.  There is a small clinic in the ward called Helen 
Devoe  Clinic,  which  was  also  surrounded  by  water.  Two  schools  were  reported  to  be 
surrounded by water and these are  Kanyama  Basic as well as  a community school named 
Twashuka community school.  All the 6 main roads in this ward are surrounded by water, 
with  4  of  these  roads  partly  damaged  and  2  completely  damaged  and  impassable.  These 
include Los Angeles and Mutanda Bantu Mbasela, there is a community hall in the area that 
is said to have been partly damaged.  Of the 6 markets scattered around the ward, 5 were 
said  to  be  surrounded  by  water  and  1,  Sikota  Wina  market  was  said  to  have  been 
completely damaged. In Kanyama Ward 10, at least 70 households have been integrated, 20 
are  shelterless  but  were  registered  for  relocation  to  the  stadium,  while  100  are  still 
occupying  the  same  damaged  houses.  2  families  are  living  in  a  church/  community  hall, 
while 40 have moved from their homes and are renting elsewhere. 
 
Coping strategies  
In  order  to  cope  with  these  floods,  the  majority  of  the  people  of  Kanyama  Ward  10  have 
bought gumboots to protect their feet as they wade through the floodwater.  In the houses 
that are surrounded by the floodwater, people have placed sand bags in order to block the 
water from entering their homes.  However in most cases this has not deterred the water 
from entering the homes and in such cases some families have had to abandon their homes 
and have relocated.  Those that have not relocated have just elevated their furniture so that 
it doesn’t get wet and placed blocks or planks to step on. 
 
Proposed mitigation and response measures  
The  community  is  proposing  that  the  area  should  be  immediately  sprayed/  disinfected 
especially  the  water  logged  areas,  water  should  also  be  pumped  out  of  the  waterlogged 
areas,  chlorine  should  be  provided  to  put  in  drinking  water,  mosquito  nets  should  be 
provided, families that have been most affected should be relocated by the government and 
that food aid should be provided.  The Ward Development Committee should be provided 
with  protective  clothing  as  well  so  they  can  safely  go  out  in  communities  to  assess  the 
impact and identify those families that it might be necessary to relocate. 
 
Medium term measures should include sensitising the community on health and sanitation, 
burying of manholes that have caused deaths,  better toilets should be constructed as well 
as the commencement of construction of a proper drainage system.  Those households that 
have been hardest hit should be provided with grants so that they can start afresh.  There 
are 120 community members who were picked to be trained in disaster risk reduction and 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   19

 

disaster  management  by  DMMU.    These  should  be  trained  and  empowered  in  order  for 
them to implement what they learn. 
 
In the long term, the community would like to see the settlement upgraded, construction of 
good roads, completion of the construction of the clinic in the ward and construction of a 
school in the ward.  It was emphasised that the government should include the community 
in the process of finding solutions on the flooding problems in Kanyama constituency and 
also on the implementation of these projects. 
 
Community Preparedness, Response and Monitoring 
Prior  to  the  onset  to  the  rains,  intervention  measures  taken  were  the  unblocking  of  the 
drainage system. This drainage clearance was done by SPURRZ (Strengthening Peri-urban 
Risk  Reduction).    There  was  also  road  rehabilitation  under  Constituency  Development 
Fund (CDF) in conjunction with CARE International in Zambia and Lusaka City Council. The 
rehabilitated  roads  included  Mutanda-Bantu  Mbasela,  Los  Angeles,  Abwino-aende  roads. 
About  9.8  Billion  Kwacha  was  allocated  to  Kanyama  for  drainage  clearance  and 
construction  with  CARE  Zambia  put  as  the  implementing  agency.    This  however  is  being 
done  without  the  community’s  involvement.  In  terms  of  monitoring  arrangements,  the 
WDC used to supervise the road rehabilitation for Abwino Aende road.  The council insisted 
on doing the monitoring for the drainage clearance. 
 
 
5.3.2 Harry Mwaanga Ward 11 
Livelihood 
The  main  livelihood  source  for  the  people  in  this  ward  is  trading.    This  is  in  three  main 
types  namely  vending,  trading  in  stalls  e.g.  payphone  and  tuntemba  and  lastly  trading  in 
small items i.e cooking oil, vegetables etc. The second livelihood source is block making and 
thirdly  its  beer  brewing  and  selling.  In  terms  of  the  impact  the  floods  have  had  on  the 
income  source;  there  has  been  a  60%  impact  on  trading,  90%  on  block  making,  and  a 
significantly less impact of 20% on brewing and selling of beer as the majority of the people 
in the community are still drinking.  There has been a 90% impact on piece work. 
 
Effect of flood on the vulnerable community  
An estimated 85% of all the households in this area converting to at least 14,514 are said to 
have been affected by this year’s floods.  The floods were said to have been severe having 
struck in February 2010.  In the past five years floods have become an annual occurrence. 
According to  the  communities  in  2005  there  were  floods  but  only  in  some  areas,  in  2008 
the floods were bad affecting a lot more areas; however this year’s floods were said to have 
been the worst so far and were being compared to the 1978 Kanyama disaster.   
 
The  floods  have  caused  loss  of  business  as  some  places  of  business  are  surrounded  by 
water.  There have been deaths reported due to drowning in the floodwater (10 deaths so 
far have been recorded).  Water borne diseases like cholera have now been recorded in the 
community,  this  is  due  to  the  lack  of  access  to  clean  water  as  the  shallow  wells  are 
submerged  and  the  water  has  mixed  with  sewage  from  the  flooded  pit  latrines.    In  some 
places  there  is  no  piped  water  and  communities  are  solely  reliant  on  shallow  wells.  

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   20

 

Movement has been hindered as well in this ward as people have to wade through water.  
This also is the reason people are developing sores on the feet. There has been an increase 
in the crime rate in the area now as well as prostitution due to the increase in poverty due 
to loss of business. 
 
In  terms  of  infrastructure  damage;  approximately  35%  (6290)  houses  have  been  partly 
damaged while less than 1% (115) have been completely damaged, whereas approximately 
90% of all the houses (15,368) in the community are surrounded by water.  3 schools are 
surrounded  by  water  and  these  are  John  Laing  Basic,  Kanyama  Basic  and  the  newly 
constructed  Kanyama  central  Basic  school.  There  are  about  2  roads,  Ben-Bella  and  Los 
Angeles which have been partly damaged while 6 have been completely damaged namely; 
Millennium, Chinyama, Police road, Chipolopolo, Titanic and Mobil roads.  All these 8 roads 
are  surrounded  by  water.    The  two  Police  posts  Los  Angeles  and  John  Laing  Police  posts 
have  been  surrounded  by  water.    There  are  6  markets  (Sekelela,  Soweto,  Transmitter, 
Malasha,  Pamodzi  and  Chibolya  markets)  and  15  churches  in  and  around  this  ward  and 
these  are  all  surrounded  by  water.    85%  of  the  toilets  in  this  ward  are  surrounded  by 
water.  Of  the  affected  households  in  Harry  Mwaanga  Ward  11,  about  40%  (6830)  have 
integrated,  less  than  1%  (55)  are  shelterless,  at  least  7,257  (40%)  households  are 
occupying  the  same  damaged  houses  and  about  3%  (500)  have  moved  and  are  renting 
elsewhere. 
 
Coping strategies 
In  order  to  cope  with  the  flood  situation,  most  of  the  people  of  Harry  Mwanga  Ward  11 
have bought gumboots that they wear. They are also digging furrows to channel the water 
from their yards. Others are putting sandbags in order to prevent water from entering their 
houses and also elevating furniture by putting them on blocks so they don’t get wet. 
 
Proposed mitigation and response measures 
The  community  would  like  in  the  short  term;  portable  toilets  to  be  provided,  the  worst 
affected families to be relocated, the stagnant water to be disinfected and also pumping out 
of  the  flood  water.    Measures  for  the  medium  term  are  to  build  a  clinic  for  John  Laing, 
construct  a  market,  commence  the  construction  of  a  proper  drainage  system,  increased 
access to drinking water by increasing the number of taps in the area and using high grade 
gravel  on  the  roads  when  grading  them.    In  the  long  term,  the  community  would  like 
schools to be constructed, giving of plots be done in a planned manner, the roads be raised, 
construction of a school and market. 
 
Community Preparedness, Response and Monitoring 
Prior to the rains the community was involved in a number of projects in preparation for 
the  coming  of  the  rains.    These  included  unblocking  of  drainages,  solid  waste  removal, 
cleaning of schools and markets as well as distribution of chlorine. 
There  was  close  monitoring  of  all  these  projects  by  the  WDC  which  was  supervising  the 
progress  of  these  projects.  Since  the  onset  of  the  rains,  there  has  been  the  exercise  of 
chlorinating  water  at  the  communal  taps.    There  has  also  been  the  spraying  the  stagnant 
water, which is breeding ground for malaria. 
 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   21

 

5.3.3 Munkolo Ward 12 

Livelihood 
The main livelihood source in this ward is trading,  followed by the second major livelihood 
source  which  is  the  group  which  is  in  formal  employment  working  either  in  the  private 
sector or in the civil service and thirdly is the group in informal employment. 
In  terms  of  the  impact  the  floods  have  had  on  these  livelihood  sources;  trading  has  been 
75% impacted due to the bad roads which people are now avoiding leading to the loss of 
business.    Those  who  are  in  formal  employment  have  not  been  impacted  much  (20%)  as 
they still go for work except that the bad, sometimes impassable roads have affected their 
work.    Thirdly  is  the  group  in  informal  employment  where  the  floods  have  had  a  60% 
impact. 
 
Effect of flood on the vulnerable community 
There  are  approximately  90%  of  the  households  in  this  ward  (4,270),  which  have  been 
affected by the floods which were said to have been severe having struck in February. This 
year  has  been  said  to  be  the  worst  in  terms  of  the  community  experience  on  the  flood 
occurrence in past five years. 
 
Flooding  in  this  ward  has  caused  a  problem  in  the  sewer  system.    The  sewer  system  has 
been  flooded  hence  households  are  not  able  to  flush  their  toilets.    There  has  been  an 
increase  of  malaria  cases  as  well  as  fever.    Movement  especially  in  the  night  has  been 
hampered  as  the  roads  in  this  area  are  almost  impassable.  This  has  brought  about 
depression in the homes. 
 
In terms of infrastructure damage 55 houses were partly damaged while 20 houses in the 
area were  said to be  surrounded by water. There is no record of any house that has been 
completely damaged due to the rains. As  for clinics, there is one which is the ZNS Makeni 
Preventive  Health  Care  Center  that  was  reportedly  surrounded  by  water.  All  the  6  roads 
that lead into the main Kafue road have all completely been damaged and are surrounded 
by water.  The sewer system has been affected by the floods with 55 completely flooded. 
There  are  55  households  that  were  reported  to  be  occupying  the  same  damaged  houses 
while  2  households  were  relocated  and  another  two  have  since  moved  and  are  renting 
elsewhere. 
 
Coping strategies 
Some of the coping strategies that the people  of Munkolo Ward are implementing are the 
pumping out of water in the flooded sewer system to enable them flush their toilets.  Sand 
bags have been put in order to block water from entering the yard.  In some cases blocks or 
big stones are being laid in order for people to step on when passing.  
 
Proposed mitigation and response measures 
Short  term  measures  include  putting  gravel  on  the  roads  to  make  them  passable  and  to 
allow  for  movement  of  traffic.  It  was  suggested  that  there  should  be  the  continuous 
pumping  of  water  from  the  flooded  areas  into  the  drainage  and  also  the  disinfecting  of 
stagnant water. 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   22

 

Once the rains finish the community would like to see permanent good gravel roads being 
made as well as a proper drainage system to be dug. In the long term, the gravel roads in 
this area should be upgraded to tarmac. There should be a good big drainage system with 
the  sewer  system  being  connected  to  the  main  one  for  Lusaka  Water  and  Sewerage 
Company.    Another  suggestion  was  for  the  council  to  ensure  that  plots  are  first  of  all 
serviced before being put up for sale. 
  
Community Preparedness, Response and Monitoring 
There was the  exercise of making drainage from Maseta to Kakhole which was underway 
and community members had actually even started contributing resources for this project, 
with  a  committee  actually  put  in  place  to  make  follow-ups.  Since  the  onset  of  the  rains 
however  there  hasn’t  been  any  intervention  measure  put  up  to  respond  to  the  flood 
situation. 
 
                                                  
5.4 Mandevu Constituency  
5.4.1 Justin Kabwe ward 21 
Livelihood 
Most  of  the  people  are  involved  in  small  retail  business  with  a  very  little  profit,  ranging 
from  selling groceries,  groundnuts,  tomatoes  etc,  whilst others  do  piece  works  within  the 
communities.  The  residents  complained  of  bad  roads  and  depreciation  of  kwacha  which 
has hampered the growth of their business as compared to last year (2009) 
 
Effects of floods on vulnerable community   
About  90%  of  the  Mandevu  community  has  been  affected  by  floods,  though  the  nature  of 
floods did  not  warrant  relocation.  One house  collapsed  near  north  east  of  Mutambe  Basic 
School.    Ponding  is  most  prominent  and  that  is  described  as  the  most  disturbing 
phenomenon.  School  children  temporarily  stopped  attending  classes  at  Mutambe  Basic 
School.  The  internal  road  from  the  bus  stop  leading  to  Kasangula  road  has  been  badly 
damaged. Some areas, some toilets were filled as a result high water table leading to feacal 
matter mixing with excess water. This situation was forcing people to resort to using shake 
shake packs for the call of nature. It was also reported that about 9 cases of cholera were 
reported at the health centre.  
 
Although they have been experiencing similar problems for the last five years, most of the 
current hazards occurred this year, January to March 2010. 
 
 
Impact (Damages Done) 
According to the residents 90% of the houses were affected but the team’s assessment was 
60%  houses  are  affected.  20%  partly  damaged,  35%  surrounded  by  water  and  5% 
completely damaged. No Clinic was affected but Mutambe Basic School had the wall fence 
collapse  and  one  class  room  is  submerged  in  water.  The  people  who  were  renting  the 
damaged houses have since moved to new places whilst landlords have resolved staying in 
the same house though their beds and other properties are on top of either stones or metal 
buckets. Outside they have dug trenches to allow water to flow as a copping strategy.  

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   23

 

In the short term, the community is working on the drainages and putting of the culverts 
while  in  the  medium  term  they  hope  the  ward  will  be  funded  for  infrastructure 
development and long term plans include putting up concrete drainages systems. 
 
Efforts by the Community& monitoring tool 
No  monitoring  plans  in  place.  The  WDC  made  efforts  of  acquiring  some  funds  and  other 
materials  from  well-wishers  such  as  TAP  which  gave  them  5  culverts;  Chilanga  Cement 
gave  them  50  bags  of  Cement  but  they  are  still  waiting  for  CDF  funds  to  carry  on  with 
works in the community. The WDC has also done some sensitizing campaign mechanism to 
inform people about the importance of cleanness and cabbage collections. 
 
5.4.2 Ngwerere Ward 19 (Luangwa Zone 6) 
Livelihood  
40% are in informal employment, another 40% are doing small business and 20% are into 
farming.  The  residents  indicated  that  the  number  of  individuals  working  has  drastically 
reduced since last year due to some companies that were closed as a result of global crisis 
and is still the case even this year. 
 
Impact (Damages Done) 
The main causes of the floods apart from natural rains are three main drainages off loading 
water  into  the  area.  According  our  identification  70%  (6,878)  of  the  houses  are  affected. 
10%  (983) houses  partly  damaged  and  9%  (844)  houses  surrounded  by  water.  No  house 
was  completely  damaged.  However  the  floods  partly  damaged  4  bridges,  3  roads  partly 
damaged,  3  roads  completely  damaged  and  2  Schools  (White  River  and  Malagy)  are 
surrounded by water. The people who were renting the damaged houses have since moved 
to new places whilst landlords have resolved staying in the same house. 
 
Interventions  
Short term include working on the drainages and putting of the culverts, mosquitoes nets 
to be provided and spraying is needed, chlorine and mobile clinic. Medium term activities 
include  constructing  of  drainages  to  receive  water  from  central  district  and  Manda  hill 
shopping  complexes.  In  the  long  term  a  concrete  drainages  systems  needs  to  be 
constructed, building a clinic and tarring the roads 
 
With  regards  to  monitoring,  the  WDC  &  Zonal  Committee  goes  round  to  check.  The  WDC 
and the residents have contributed money to repair the roads and drainage systems.  
 
5.4.3 Chaisa Ward 20 
Livelihood  
5%  are  in  formal  employment,  60%  doing  small  business,  1%  prostitution  and  44% 
nothing.  
 
Impact (Damages Done) 
Heavy rains have caused a lot of floods especially on the lower parts of the ward such that 
water enters into their houses since December 2009, and the situation has been the same 
for  the  past  five  years  with  this  year  being  the  worst  hit.  This  also  has  forced  a  lot  of 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   24

 

children failing to attend some classes. There was damage on infrastructure which included 
6 houses partly damaged, 50 houses surrounded by water, 1 house completely damaged, 4 
bridges  partly  damaged,  3  bridges  completely  damaged,  4  culverts  completely  damaged 
with the great north road right by Mandevu market as the worst hit. 10 toilets completely 
damaged, no school affected.  
 
In the short term the community will be working on the drainages from great north road 
through  to  the  railway  and  putting  of  the  culverts,  cleaning  the  cabbage  in  and  along  the 
drainages.  Medium  term  includes  putting  up  concrete  drainages  to  receive  water  from 
industrial  areas.  In  the  long  term,  it  is  proposed  that  there  should  be  up-grading  of  the 
ward by construction better houses and roads. 
 
The WDC & Zonal Committee goes round to check the infrastructure that is vandalized and 
garbage that has been thrown anyhow. Efforts by the community included the WDC and the 
residents  contributing  money  to  work on  the drainages  and  garbage  collection.  The  WDC 
also have sensitized their communities on the importance of cleanliness and the dangers of 
throwing garbage any how  
 
5.4.4 Roma Ward 17 (Ng’ombe Zone) 
Livelihood 
There are 20% formal employed, 60%  doing small business, 5% Maids and house boys, 9%  
vending  and  6%  nothing.  The  situation  in  terms  of  livelihood  has  not  changed  since  last 
year (2009) 
 
Impact (Damages Done) 
Heavy rains have caused a lot of floods especially on the lower parts of the ward such that 
water enters into their houses since December. When compared to the past five years, the 
situation has been the same with this year being the worst hit. This also has forced a lot of 
children failing to attend some classes.  
 
The  floods  resulted  in  4  houses  partly  damaged,  1  surrounded  by  water,  3  completely 
damaged, no Clinic partly/damaged, 3 bridges completely damaged (Kasisi, Aisha I&II, two 
lives  were  lost  at  Aisha  II),  8  roads  were  partly  damaged,  3  toilets  completely  damaged. 
Similar to the other wards/zones, the people who were renting the damaged houses have 
since  moved  to  new  places  whilst  landlords  have  resolved  staying  in  the  same  house. 
Waterborne diseases, diarrhea was report. 
 
In  the  short  term  the  community  intends  to  connecting  water  to  their  ward/zone  and 
working on  the  drainages.  Medium  term  activities  include  construction  of  the  three  main 
bridges  and  resurfacing  the  roads  and  in  the  long  term  the  community  is  asking  for  a 
secondary school and a mini hospital to be built. 
 
The  community  worked  on  the  bridge  through  funds  from  CDF  and  also  worked  on  the 
drainage along the main road.   
 
 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   25

 

5.4.5 Roma Ward 17 (Mazyopa zone 13) 
Livelihood 
The  majority  of  the  people  are  engaged  in  small  business  (70%),  18%  are  literally  doing 
nothing, 8% are Maids and house boys while 4% are in formal employment.  
 
Impact (Damages Done) 
The  situation  in  Mazyopa  is  severe.  13  houses  were  partly  damaged,  1  house  was 
surrounded by water, 11 completely damaged, 1 bridges was completely damaged, 1 main 
road  partly  damaged,  4  toilets  completely  damaged,  schools  and  clinics  were  intact.  The 
people  who  were  renting  the  damaged  houses  have  since  moved  to  new  places  whilst 
landlords have resolved staying in the same houses. There were cases of diarrhea recorded.   
 
Proposed  suggestion  in  the  short  term  is  that  the  compound  should  be  legalized  and  the 
residents work on the drainages. In the medium term, the bridge and Mazyopa road should 
be worked on.  
 
5.4.6 Garden Ward 19  
Livelihood 
The main occupation of the people (60%) is doing small business (such as marketing), 30% 
are employed formally, 5% vending and 5% are doing nothing. No change in the livelihoods 
of the people since last year. 
 
Impact (Damages Done) 
Heavy rains have caused a lot of floods especially on the lower parts of the zone such that 
water  enters  into  their houses  since  January,  and  the  situation has  been  the  same  for  the 
past five years with this year being the worst hit.  
 
There were 4 houses which were partly damaged, 3 surrounded by water, 6 bridges partly 
damaged,  5  completely  damaged,  6  roads  were  partly  damaged  while  4  completely 
damaged (and impassable). There was no effect on the other infrastructure like schools and 
clinics. Health related impacts included outbreak of diseases such as cholera and diarrhea. 
Blocked drainages lead to mosquito breeding which resulted in increased cases of malaria. 
 
The community will work on the drainages and garbage collection in the short and medium 
term while in the long term the roads need to be tarred.  
 
 
5.4.7 Ngwerere Ward 19, KANELE  
 
Livelihood 
In  terms  of  livelihood,  70%  are  doing  business  mostly  retail  trading  famously  known  as 
(tuntemba).  This  comprises  various  goods  or  groceries.  20%  are  generally  involved  in 
casual  work  vis-à-vis  gardening,  car  cleaning,  etc  in  the  near  by  conventional  areas  like 
Olympia Extension and other areas. The rest are in formal employment, which is 10%. 
 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   26

 

It was evident that the floods caused substantial damage to infrastructure which included 1 
house  was  partly  damaged,  1  house  was  reported  to  have  collapsed,  4  roads;  Gabon  , 
Pandela, Kanele and Chihande were in bad shape, 1 bridge was reported washed away by 
heavy  rains  and  4  centre  roads  have  been  completely  damaged.  Outbreak  of  cholera  was 
reported by the health personnel  
 
The  community  wants  to  embark  on  road  and  drainage  rehabilitation  in  the  short  term. 
There was no mention of monitoring activities because the WDC was inactive. 
 
 
6.0 Recommendations  
 

•  The  current  efforts  made  by  the  Government  and  its  cooperating  partners  such  as  
relocating  the  severely  affected  families,  provision  of  pumps  for  pumping  water 
from water logged areas, clearing the drainages and attending to roads is a  step in 
the  right  direction  in  minimizing  the  negative  impacts  of  the  floods  on  vulnerable 
population.  This  kind  of  initiative  needs  to  be  promoted,  supported  and  scaled  up 
with the involvement of other stakeholders such as  the community, NGOs based in 
the affected communities and UN Agencies.  
 

•  The pumping out of water that is stagnant which is currently happening in Kamwala 

Ward should be extended to Kabwata and Chawama Wards.  
 
Since most of the drainages are blocked by garbage, the Lusaka City Council should 
embark  on  the  programme  of  regularly  collecting  garbage  so  that  the  drainage 
system is cleared and allow free passage of water.  

•  The relocation programme that is going on in Chawama ward should be extended to 
those  families  that  are  living  in  a  deplorable  environment  including  those  in  the 
other  constituencies  especially  Kanyama.  Those  families  that  are  completely 
surrounded  by  water  may  need  to  be  evacuated  to  drier  areas  and  provided  with 
temporary  shelter  and  other  relief  supplies  till  around  June/  July  when  the  areas 
will have naturally dried up.  

 

• 

 

The assessment approximated that 60 affected families may need to be evacuated in 
Chawama, 40 in Kamwala, 20 in old Kanyama and 55 in Kabwata. 
 
In  the  long  term  proper  construction  and  rehabilitation  of  infrastructure  (road 
network  and  drainage  system)  should  be  properly  attended  to  or  planned.  The 
roads need to be raised and tarred especially those running within the wards. 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   27

 

 

•  Road  Development  Agency  (RDA)  should  conduct  a  technical  assessment  of  the 
damaged roads, bridges and culverts of economic importance, and develop an action 
plan for the repair works to these structures. 

•  There  is  need  for  disinfecting  the  affected  households  especially  that  are 
surrounded  by  water  and  those  whose  septic  tanks  are  overflowing.  The  total 
number  that  needs  this  type  of  assistance  is  1,553.  Chlorine  as  a  way  of  treating 
drinking water should be distributed to the same number of households.  
 

•  There is need for relevant authorities who allocate plots not to allocate residential 
plots  where  there  are  drainages  or  areas  earmarked  for  road  construction.  During 
construction, the authorities need to be on the ground to monitor the structure and 
ensure  that  durable  housing  units  are  built.  This  action  should  be  reinforced  with 
community  sensitization  by  the  Ward  Development  Committees  and  other 
Community  Based  Organizations.  For  example,  Chawama  zone  14  may  consider 
demolition of  some  “illegal” housing  structures  to pave-way  for well defined  roads 
and drainages in the interest of the entire ward. 
 

 
 
7.0 Conclusion  
 
The assessment has revealed that out of the total of 14 wards that were identified by the 
District  Disaster  Management  Committee  as  being  severely  and  moderately  affected,  10 
wards  (71%)  were  verified  and  confirmed  to  be  actually  severe  and  moderate,  while  the 
other  4  (29%)  were  found  to have  been  impacted  lowly  by  the  floods.    The  magnitude  in 
terms  of  impact  on  households  was  63%  for  Kabwata,  88%  for  Kanyama,  83%  for 
Chawama  and  43%  for  Mandevu  constituency.    This  translates  to  7,784  households  in 
Kabwata, 31,203 in Kanyama, 14,601 in Chawama and 18,763 in Mandevu. 
The  main  impact  was  on  the  infrastructure  especially  homesteads  and  roads.  There  was 
less impact on education in terms of school attendance. The floods had a negative effect on 
water and sanitation and resulted in 11 flood related deaths.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   28

 

Annex 1: Damage to infrastructure 
Name 
Damage  
1.  Zipas  road  from  the  traffic 

Infrastructure 

Kabwata 

of 

Constituency 

Ward 
Kamwala 
Ward 5 

Kanyama 

Old 
Kanyama 
Ward 10 

Katwishi,  Tambalala,  Chuma 
Chienda  and  David  Kaunda 
Markets 
 

1.  Helen Devoe Clinic 

 

2.  Twashuka  Community 

School 
 

3.  Mutanda 

Bantu 

Mbasela road 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   29

Kabwata 
Ward 6 

Libala 

Chawama 
ward 2 
 

Nkoloma 
Ward 1 

Chawama 

lights at St Patrick  

2.  Road  behind  and  along 

Kamwala High school 

1.  Internal 

roads  around 
and 
New 
Kabwata Site and Service  

Kabwata 

1.  Nationalist 

road 

after 
Chilimbulu  rd  traffic  light  
into Kamwala South  

2.  Yotam  Muleya  road  from 

Barracks to Water Works 

1.  Road separating Kuku and 

 

Chawama 

2.  Koumboka internal roads 
3.  Road 
long  Chimwemwe 

Basic School 
1.  Time road  
2.  Nyerere 

road  Swazi 
road  Dziko  Nibantu 
Katambalala road 

3.  Redeemed 

Baptist 
Apostolic 
CCAP 

church, 
Church, 
Pentecostal Church 

of 

Description 
Damage 
Pools  of  water  and 
big  potholes/  gullies 
along the roads 

 

 

-Completely 
damaged 
-Surrounded 
water 
-Surrounded 
water 
 
 
-Surrounded 
water 

by 

by 

by 

by 

by 

-Surrounded 
water 
-Surrounded 
water 
 
 
-Partly  damaged  and 
surrounded by water 

 

 
 

 

4.  Sikota Wina Market 

 

Harry 
Mwanga 
Ward 11 

1.  John Laing Basic School 

 

2.  Sakala,  mobil 

and 

Mandevu 

Titanic roads 
 

3.  Los Angeles road  

 

4.  Los  Angeles  and  John 

Laing Police posts 
 

5.  Chibolya 
sekelela, 
pamodzi 
transmitter markets 

Market, 
malasha, 
and 

1.  ZNS 

Preventative 

Health Center  

1. School wall fence  
2.  Drainage 
church 

from  Catholic 

Blocked drainage  

Roads  

Road  

Drainage 
Road  

Munkolo 
Ward 12 
Justin 
Kabwe, 
ward 21 

Ngwerere 
Ward 19 - 
Luangwa, 
Zone 6 

Roma 
Ward  17, 
(Ng’ombe 
Roma 
Ward    17, 
(Mazyopa) 
Ngwerere 
Ward  19, 
Garden, 
Kanele 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   30

 
 
-Completely 
and 
damaged 
surrounded by water 
-Surrounded 
by 
water 
-completely 
damaged 
and 
surrounded by water 
 
-Partly  damaged  and 
surrounded by water 
 
-Surrounded 
water 
 
 
-Surrounded 
water 

by 

by 

by 

-Surrounded 
water 
School  wall 
fence 
partly  collapsed  and 
from 
drainage 
Catholic 
church 
blocked  
The  main  problem  is 
blocking  of  drainage 
from  Coptic  hospital, 
North mead, Fatmols 
and Manda Hill 
Zambezi  and  Zoxy 
roads 
affected 
damaged  
Mazyopa  road  has 
been affected 

Some 
drainage 
blocked  and  Kanele, 
chihande and Garden 
roads affected 

 

Annex 2: Team Composition and Constituencies  Covered 
 
Team   Constituency   Ward  
1 

1.  Kamwala Ward 5 

Kabwata/ 
Chawama  

Team composition  
Team leader: Douglas Mwasi 
Team  Members: 
Martin Mushiba, Ceasar Siakacha 
District  Staff:  Elizabeth 
Elijah Kampwa (Kabwata) 
 

  Bwalya  Kalilo, 

Jereshi/ 

2.  Kabwata Ward 6 

3.  Libala Ward 7 

4.  Chawama ward 2 

2 

 
Mandevu  

3 

Kanyama 
Chawama 

/ 

 
 
 

 

 

1.  Justin  Kabwe  Ward 

21 

2.  Ngwerere  ward  19 

(Luangwa zone 6)  

Team Leader: Burton Mukomba  
Team  Members:  Rhoda  Banda, 
Eunice  Chishimba,  Catherine  Chali 
and Michael Akakelwa 
District Staff: Moses Milimo  

3.  Chaisa Ward 20 

4. 

  ward  
 Ngwerere 
19, Garden (Gabon) 
zone 19 

5.  Roma  Ward  17 

(Ng’ombe) 

6.  Roma  Ward  17, 

(Mazyopa) 

1.  Chawama Ward 1 

2.  Old Kanyama Ward  

10 

3.  Harry 

Mwanga 

Ward 11 

4.  Munkolo Ward 12 

Team  Leader:  Beauty  Shamboko 
Mbale  
Team  Member:  Naomi  Miti,  Mwila 
Chimpampwe, Agrippa Banda 
District Staff: Aaron Kachunga 
 

 
 
 
 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   31

 

 
Annex 3 Report Writing Team 
 

 

 

1.  Burton Mukomba,   CARE Zambia  

 
 

2.  Douglas Mwasi,  C-FAARM Programme  

 
 

 

 

3.  Beauty Shamboko Mbale, Department of Water Affairs 

 

ZVAC Rapid Assessment Report, March 2010   32

