                     
 
The joint assessment team at work  IFRC / CR DRC    DREF Operation n MDRCD016 
  Operation start date:19 December 2016 
  Date of issue : 2 March 2016 Timeframe covered by this update:  19 December 
2015 to 10 February 2016  DREF revision : 26 February 2016 
  Operations timeframe: Four months (New end date: 
31 March 2016)  Overall budget allocation: Original allocation: CHF 191,646 
Additional allocation n 1: CHF 98,979 
Total allocation: CHF 290,625  Number of people affected: 10,560 people (2,112 
families)  Number of people to be assisted: 5,115 people (875 
families).  Host National Society presence (volunteers, staff, branches): Branches covering the districts of Debonhome, 
KingabuaNdanu, KingabuaPcheur and Salongo neighbourhoods of Kinshasa, plus those covering the new 
municipalities of Kindele, Kimbondo, Masanga-Mbila and Ngansele neighbourhoods in the Mont NGafula municipality,  
The National Society will cover 3 staff, 4 NDRTs, 10 supervisors, and 60 volunteers for this operation  
Red Cross Red Crescent Movement partners actively involved in the operation: Belgian Red Cross, Canadian 
Red Cross, International Committee of the Red Cross, International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Societies, Spanish Red Cross and Swedish Red Cross 
Other partner organizations actively involved in the operation: None   
This DREF bulletin covers the request for an extension of the timeframe of this operation by six weeks (new  end date: 31 March 2016) and for an additional allocation of CHF 98,979 to expand the activities planned into  the Kindele, Kimbondo, Masanga-Mbila and Ngansele neighbourhoods in the Mont NGafula municipality,  which have been identified as being in most need of assistance following the completion of a detailed  assessment. An additional 2,615 people (375 families) will be reached through the DREF operation. (Total:  5,115 people or 875 families).    A. Situation analysis  Description of the disaster   
Since mid-November 2015, extensive rainfall in the Democratic 
Republic of Congo (DRC) has led to flooding across the country. 
On 6 December, the heavy rains led to the overflow of the Ndjili 
River causing flooding in the Debonhome, KingabuaNdanu, 
KingabuaPcheur and Salongo neighbourhoods of the capital 
Kinshasa, affecting 10,560 people (2,112 families) and resulting 
in 31 deaths and numerous injuries.  The Processing Centre of 
the Water Distribution Authority serving Kinshasa along the river 
Ndjili was damaged, reducing the available safe water supply. 
As of 10 February 2016, the waters had receded in the 
Debonhomme and Salongo neighbourhoods, however the 
neighbourhoods of KingabuaPecheur and KingabuaNdanu are 
still flooded, obliging the population of these two neighbourhoods 
to use canoes as means of transportation.  Other municipalities  DREF operations update  Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods    
Volunteer training practice session on shelters  DRC RC  in Kinshasa have also been affected by the floods, following heavy rains, which have continued throughout January 
and February, including in Massina, Mont NGafula and Ngaliema. 
  
On 19 December 2015, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) released CHF  191,646 from the Disaster Relief Emergency Fund (DREF) to 
support the Red Cross of the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo respond to the needs of the affected population in 
the Debonhome, KingabuaNdanu, KingabuaPcheur and 
Salongo neighbourhoods of Kinshasa. The DREF operation 
was intended to support an initial 2,500 people (500 families) 
and to carry out a detailed needs assessment in other areas of 
Kinshasa affected by the floods, where information on the 
scale of the flooding was not yet available.  The results of the 
needs assessment have now been incorporated into this 
revised Emergency Plan of Action (EPoA) and DREF 
extension request. 
 
This Operations Update is requesting an extension to the 
timeframe of the operation by six weeks and an additional 
allocation from the DREF of CHF 98,979 to expand the  planned activities into the Kindele, Kimbondo, Masanga-Mbila and Ngansele neighbourhoods in the Mont NGafula 
municipality. This request also seeks to revise the proposed strategy for the activities planned in relation to the 
provision of shelter.  The CR DRC will now reach an additional 2,615 people (375 families) bringing the total assisted 
to 5,115 people (875 families). The extended DREF operation will now end on 31 March 2016, and a final report will be 
made available at the end of July. Please refer to the Needs analysis and scenario planning section of this 
Operations Update for more information on is this revision.  
 
The major donors and partners of the DREF include the Red Cross Societies and governments of Australia, Austria, 
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Monaco, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden 
and the USA, as well as DG ECHO, the UK Department for International Development (DFID) the Medtronic and 
Zurich Foundations and other corporate and private donors. The IFRC, on behalf of the Red Cross Society of 
Democratic Republic of Congo would like to extend many thanks to all partners for their generous contributions.  
  <click here for the contact details and here for the revised budget > 
 
Summary of current response   
Overview of Host National Society  Following the launch of the DREF allocation, the CR DRC has carried out several activities in response to the flooding 
and in line with the agreed EPoA: 
 
 Completed a detailed assessment, which has informed this revision of the EPoA. 
 Trained 30 volunteers and five supervisors on health and hygiene promotion,  
 Reached a total of 12,070 people with health and hygiene promotion, through a house-to-house approach in the  four targeted neighbourhoods. This exceeds the intended target (2,500 people), and is still ongoing.  It will be 
extended under this revision.   Distributed non-food items (NFIs) to 500 of the most vulnerable families identified in Debonhome, KingabuaNdanu, 
KingabuaPcheur and Salongo neighbourhoods.   Trained 30 volunteers and five supervisors on shelter construction and distribution techniques - a shelter model 
was constructed following the training to be used as a model for future shelter assistance.   Reoriented the proposed strategy for emergency shelter and briefed volunteers on this, so that volunteers are 
prepared to change their intervention. 
  Please refer to the Operational Framework section for more information on the current response. 
 
 
   Group photo of participants and trainers at the training session   
IFRC                                  A view of the volunteers during an outreach session  IFRC                                        Overview of Red Cross Red Crescent Movement in country  The IFRC in-country presence in DRC comprises of two national staff, who are assisted by the Central Africa 
Country Cluster Support Team (CCST) in Yaound, and by the Africa Regional Office in Nairobi. Following the 
launch of the DREF operation, the IFRC deployed two Regional Disaster Response Team (RDRT) members with 
expertise in assessment/logistics (Togo) and shelter (Madagascar) to support the RC DRC with the assessment and 
effective start-up/implementation of activities. The RDRT supporting assessment/logistics was deployed for one 
month has now completed their mission, while the RDRT for shelter has been extended for an additional month (total 
of two months) to support the finalization of the planned shelter activities. Please note that the DREF allocation has 
been supplemented by additional financial support from the Canadian Red Cross, which has funded the deployment 
of these RDRTs.  
 
Partner National Societies (PNS) in DRC include the Belgian Red Cross, Canadian Red Cross, Spanish Red Cross 
and Swedish Red Cross, while the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) also has extensive presence in 
DRC, however no additional support has been provided by Movement partners in response to the floods. Regular 
Movement coordination meeting have been convened with all partners to inform them of the situation.  
 
Overview of non-RCRC actors in country  At the time of this Operations Update, a flood crisis committee has been set up by the Government at the Office of the 
Prime Minister and technical committees have been set up in the following affected provinces: Central Congo, 
quateur, Kinshasa and Tshopol. Other humanitarian actors are working under the coordination of the United Nations 
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) and regular meetings are being convened, during which 
statistical data coming in from the various provinces is analysed and updated.  The Government team (Ministry of 
Humanitarian Affairs, Social Action and Solidarity) has carried out field missions to the affected provinces, while the 
Ministry of Social Affairs and Humanitarian Action is coordinating assessments.  
 
Needs analysis and scenario planning   
Needs analysis: In total, 10,560 people were affected in the Debonhome, KingabuaNdanu, KingabuaPcheur and 
Salongo neighbourhoods of Kinshasa, of which 8,480 (1,696 families) lost their homes and property. Please refer to 
Table 1: Distribution of displaced population below.  Based on the preliminary assessment, the immediate needs of 
the affected population were identified as follows: emergency shelter, first aid, non-food items (blankets, kitchen sets, 
mats, mosquito nets, soap, and hygiene kits for women of childbearing age), environmental sanitation (clearing of 
pipes to enable water to flow more easily) and hygiene promotion.  An analysis of this information has led to the 
design of the Emergency Plan of Action (EPoA) for the DREF operation.   
    Table 1: Distribution of displaced population (Source: CR DRC)     Neighbourhood  No. displaced families No. displaced people  Debonhome 380 1,900 
KingabuaNdanu 256 1,280 
KingabuaPcheur 600 3,000 
Salongo 460 2,300 
Total 1,696 8,480   
Following the launch of the DREF operation, a detailed assessment was carried out by the RDRT 
(assessment/logistics), which identified that the targeted population in Kinshasa (2,500 people/500 families) was 
extremely limited given the number of the population affected, which increased following the heavy rainfall that 
continued throughout January and February, leaving many new neighbourhoods inundated.  As such, it was 
recommended that the DREF operation should be expanded to the Kindele, Kimbondo, Masanga-Mbila and Ngansele 
neighbourhoods in the Mont NGafula municipality, which had been identified as being amongst the worst affected.  
Due to its location (in a valley on sandy soil), all the families living in these localities were affected either by silting or 
by the flow of water, and therefore are in urgent need of assistance (hence the blanket targeting).   Please refer to 
Table 2: Distribution of displaced population in Mont NGafula municipality. 
  Table 2: Distribution of displaced population in Mont NGafula municipality (Source CR DRC)    Neighbourhood 
No. of families  affected  No. of people  affected  Completely  damaged houses  Partially damaged  houses  Kimbondo 160 1,120 45 20  Kindele 115 805 34 8  Masanga-Mbila 20 140 0 0  Ngansele 80 560 12 1  Total 375 2,625 91 29   
Other municipalities in Kinshasa including (Massina and Ngaliema) and provinces outside of the capital have also 
been affected by the flooding, however the DREF operation cannot be expanded into these areas due to capacity of 
the CR DRC local committees, which would need extensive strengthening before a response could be made, as well 
as due to logistics and supply chain issues (specifically the transportation of the items required in a timely manner). As 
such, the CR DRC, in collaboration with the IFRC, has recommended that the scope of the DREF operation be limited 
to Kinshasa, where close monitoring can be ensured by the National Society (NS) national headquarters (NHQ), and 
the logistics and supply chain issues can be reduced, rather than extending activities across a wider geographical 
area and reducing the impact on the affected population.  
 
In the original DREF allocation, the budgeted cost for materials for shelter, based on quantitative assessment of the 
prices of materials available locally, was underestimated and this had implications on the funds available and on the 
training of CR DRC volunteers (e.g. limited the number of sample shelters were constructed demo purposes).  It also 
limited the number of families that could be supported (179 versus the planned 250). As such, the original DREF 
allocation was insufficient to meet the needs of the initial target population (250 families), and to address the new 
needs that have been identified in the Mont NGafula municipality, where 128 additional families have been identified 
as in need of assistance.  
 
The CR DRC is also waiting on Government authorisation on the site to enable the construction of temporary shelters 
to accommodate those who have been displaced. Given this delay, homeless families have had to be accommodated 
by either host families or forced to seek refuge under house tilts and in high-risk areas. The CR DRC, in consultation 
with the RDRT shelter and IFRC Geneva shelter and settlements unit, proposed a plan B for more simplified 
assistance  this involves the distribution of a "cover kit" to each family. The cover kit has been developed as an 
alternative to the standard shelter kit based on a real time assessment of the needs in the target communities; and 
appropriateness of this approach. It is intended to provide immediate basic shelter by allowing quick and simple cover 
to be constructed on damaged structures. It should also be noted that the new communities are a considerable 
distance from the initial target communities, and as such additional volunteers will be required to ensure that the 
shelter needs of the new target families can be addressed as quickly as possible.    
Beneficiary Selection:   In total, the DREF operation now expects to target 5,115 people (875 families in Kinshasa) 
who will be identified/selected based on their level of vulnerability, including displaced households (whose homes 
were destroyed), the chronically ill, elderly, female-headed households, lactating mothers and pregnant women, 
children under-five and/or people with disabilities. CR DRC will continue to ensure that the DREF operation is aligned 
with the IFRCs commitment to realize gender equality and diversity. Other aspects considered will include 
prevention of sexual and gender-based violence and the protection of children.  
  B. Operational strategy and plan   
Overall Objective   
Immediate survival needs of the flood-affected population are met through the provision of essential emergency relief, 
shelter, health, water, and sanitation and hygiene promotion assistance, targeting a total of 5,115 people (875 
families)* in the Debonhome, Kimbondo, Kindele, KingabuaNdanu, KingabuaPcheur, Masanga-Mbila, Ngansele and 
Salongo neighbourhoods of Kinshasa** for a period of four months. 
 
*An additional 2,615 people (375 families) are included through this Operations Update.  **Additional neighbourhoods of Kimbondo, Kindele, Masanga-Mbila and Ngansele in the Mont NGafula  municipality included through this Operations Update.    
Proposed strategy   
Activities planned under this DREF operation, will now be expanded from the original target to include all of the 
following actions: 
   Conducting a detailed needs and gap assessment and analysis in consultation with relevant partners and 
beneficiaries with the intention of revising and monitoring the ongoing relevance of the EPoA;   Replenishment of the first aid kits (new target: 30) that have been used by volunteers in the initial response to 
enable first aid services to continue to be provided to the affected population. An additional 10 kits will be 
procured for the Red Cross committee in Mont NGafula.   Procurement/distribution of insecticide-treated, long-lasting mosquito nets (two pcs per family) to reduce the 
risk of malaria (new target: 875 families).   Procurement/distribution of water treatment chemicals (aqua tabs) to enable household water treatment, as 
well as the provision of products for cholera treatment (oral rehydration sachets). Targeted families will 
receive aqua tabs to provide them with safe water supply at household level, while community water sources 
will also be treated (new target: 875 families).   Procurement of environmental sanitation materials (brushes, bleach, chlorine, detergent, hoes, mixing 
containers, rakes, soap, sprayers and wheel barrows) and protective equipment (boots, gloves, helmets, nose 
covers and protective suits), which will be issued to 60 volunteers and community sanitation committees (new 
target: nine committees) that will be established, and responsible for cleaning the drains and gutters in their 
communities. Since many of the affected neighbourhoods remain flooded, these environmental sanitation 
activities continue to be much needed. Additional sanitation equipment (e.g. atomizers and fumigators), which 
were not budgeted in the initial DREF allocation are also required. It should be noted that sanitation materials 
will be used during the DREF operation, but also left with the CR DRC committees in communities for 
activities to continue beyond the timeframe of the DREF operation.    Training of volunteers and supervisors on health and hygiene promotion (new target: 60 volunteers + 10 
supervisors). This includes an additional 30 volunteers and five supervisors as required to enable the 
extension of activities into the new communities. Following training, the volunteers and supervisors will be 
mobilized to carry out health and hygiene promotion outreach activities with the affected population. Additional 
information, education and communication (IEC) materials are also required (image boxes, leaflets and 
posters, megaphones and batteries).    Procurement/distribution of hygiene related NFIs comprising buckets (one pc per family), hygiene/dignity kits 
(one pc per family), jerry cans (one pc per family) and soap (10 bars per family) and provision sensitization on 
their use (new target: 875 families).     Training of volunteers and supervisors (on use of shelter kits and distribution techniques (new target: 60 
volunteers + 10 supervisors). An additional 30 volunteers and five supervisors are required to enable activities 
to be extended into the new communities and to ensure that the shelter needs of the families targeted can be 
addressed as quickly as possible. Following the training the volunteers and supervisors will be mobilized to 
support the most vulnerable households with the construction of temporary shelters.   Procurement/distribution of NFIs target families comprising blankets (two pcs per family), kitchen sets (one pc 
per family), mats (two pcs per family) - (new target: 865).    Procurement/distribution of a cover shelter kit to families (new target: 242 families) that have been identified 
following assessments as requiring emergency shelter assistance to cover immediate needs until more 
appropriate support can be provided. The cover shelter kit will comprise three tarpaulins, roofing nails and 
tips, a 30m rope and tools (e.g. hammer etc.).  The CR DRC will be responsible for providing technical 
assistance on the use of the tarpaulin during distribution and offer on-the-spot support to the most vulnerable 
(single women, the elderly) in building their shelters.    A DREF operational review/lessons workshop will be conducted to capture lessons learnt, and inform 
recommendations for future IFRC and NS operations.   Operational support services    Please refer to the original EPoA, which provides an overview of the assistance from Operational support services 
required for this DREF operation  only changes to this strategy are included in this section.  
  Human resources   
The DREF operation has required the mobilization of the following personnel:      
 A Provincial Coordinator (Kinshasa) will be designated to supervise the implementation of the DREF operation  and a contribution will be made to support his/her costs for a period of four months.  
 A Head of Operations will be recruited for four months to act as a focal point for the DREF operation.  
 A NHQ Water & Sanitation officer will be designated to support the implementation of the DREF operation (e.g.  support with training etc.) for a period of 36 days. This officer will be issued with a per diem and an allowance for 
accommodation.   Four NDRTs will be designated to support the implementation of the DREF operation (e.g. support with training 
etc.) for a period of 36 days. Each NDRT will be issued with a per diem and an allowance for accommodation.   Five supervisors will be initially mobilized to support volunteers with planned activities for a period of 24 days 
(three days per week for 12 weeks). An additional five supervisors will be mobilized the activities planned in the 
neighbourhoods in in Mont NGafula, for a period of 12 days. Each supervisor will receive a daily per diem.   30 volunteers will be mobilized to support the implementation of the DREF operation, for a period of 36 days 
(three days per week for 12 weeks). An additional 30 volunteers will be mobilized the activities planned in the 
neighbourhoods in in Mont NGafula, for a period of 12 days. Each volunteer will receive a daily per diem, as well 
as a Red Cross rain bib and rain jacket. Please note that volunteers involved in sanitation activities will also be 
issued with protective equipment (boots, gloves, helmets, protective suits, sanitizer etc.). As noted, the new 
communities are a considerable distance from those that were initial targeted, and as such these additional 
volunteers are required to ensure that the activities planned can be completed as efficiently and effectively as 
possible.   A CR DRC driver will be recruited for three months and security personnel also hired for two months to ensure the 
safety and security of NFIs that are being stored.    Following the late arrival of two IFRC RDRTs due to challenges obtaining visa and other issues, there has been a 
need to extend the duration of the RDRT (shelter) by one month to ensure the effective implementation of the 
activities under the revised strategy for this sector (refer to Proposed strategy section)   An IFRC driver will also be recruited for two months. Additional technical support will also be provided by the IFRC 
regional operations coordinator and finance assistant.    
Logistics and supply chain   
The DRC RC logistics and supply chain department have weak procedures for emergencies and this has delayed the 
procurement/distribution of items required for this DREF operation. However, where possible pre-positioned stocks 
(e.g. IEC materials, megaphones etc.) have been mobilized from National Society warehouses to enable volunteers to  http://adore.ifrc.org/Download.aspx?FileId=118507 
begin the health and hygiene promotion. IFRC will work closely with DRC RC to see how best to support the 
procurement of NFIs and other equipment for the response, and if possible will use prepositioned supplies from the 
IFRC Cameroon office for this response. 
  Planning, monitoring, evaluation, & reporting (PMER)   
Following the expansion of the DREF operation, an operational review will be carried out to capture lessons learnt, 
and inform recommendations. Please note that this will be carried out in accordance with the standardized DREF 
review tool kit.   C. Detailed Operational Plan      Quality programming/ Areas common to all sectors  Outcome 1: Continuous and detailed  assessment and analysis is used to  inform the design and  implementation of the DREF  operation    Outputs  % of achievement  Output 1.1:  Rapid and detailed needs assessment are  carried out to inform the preparation/revision of the  Emergency Plan of Action; and continuous coordination  with all stakeholders  70%  Activities     Is implementation on  time? 
% progress  (estimate)        Yes  No   1.1.1 Carry out detailed assessment in consultation with relevant Partners X  100% 
1.1.2 Revise Emergency Plan of Action based on analysis of assessment  information 
X  100%  1.1.3 Monitoring of the activities planned by NHQ X  50% 
1.1.4 Deployment of two Regional Disaster Response Team members (  Shelter + Logistics) X  100%  1.1.5 Operational review` X  0% 
Progress towards outcomes  1.1.1 In total, 30 volunteers and five supervisors received training on emergency assessment techniques. Please note that 
this activity was not included in the EPoA, but covered by internal CR DRC funds. In mid-January 2016, the CR DRC 
(disaster management, PMER, heads of the Kinshasa provincial Red Cross, and National Disaster Response Team 
(NDRT) members) in collaboration with the RDRT and Belgian Red Cross country representative carried out a detailed 
assessment of the situation. The joint assessment team met with representatives from government and other 
humanitarian organizations, and also included participation in coordination and shelter cluster meetings.  The lack of 
data collection resources in other municipalities of Kinshasa and other provinces has limited timely information sharing 
and the NS consulted the data of other actors to provide key information. In addition, the late arrival of RDRTs delayed 
the detailed assessment. Nonetheless, following the completion of the detailed assessment, all findings were 
consolidated and have informed the revision of the proposed strategy for the DREF operation.    
1.1.2 The EPoA for this DREF operation has been revised based on analysis of the data collected through the detailed  assessment (refer to Activity 1.1.1); and is formalised through the issue of this Operations Update. 
  1.1.3 The CR DRC NHQ has set up a monitoring plan, which will ensure the effective monitoring and reporting of all 
activities planned in the DREF operation; as well as inform operational decision making as relevant.   
1.1.4 As noted (refer to Summary of current response section), the IFRC has deployed two Regional Disaster Response  Team (RDRT) members with expertise in assessment/ logistics (Togo), and shelter (Madagascar) to support the RC 
DRC with the effective start-up / implementation of the activities planned.  
  1.1.5 New activity included through this Operations Update - an operational review will be carried out at the end of the DREF 
operation.     Health and Care  Outcome 1:Immediate risks to health  are reduced through the provision of  community based health services in  flood-affected areas of Democratic  Republic of Congo, over a period of  four months  Outputs   % of  achievement  Output 1.1:  Target population provided with access to  community based health services, including provision of  first aid; and distribution of mosquito nets (New target:  5,115 people (875 families)  In progress  Activities     Is implementation on  time?  % progress  (estimate)         Yes  No   1.1.1 Procure / replenish of first aid kits (Target: 20 kits) X  In progress 
1.1.2 Provide first aid service and referral in flood-affected Communities  X  100% 
1.1.3 Procure/distribution of mosquito nets and provide sensitization on their  use (New target: 5,115 people (875 families)) 
X  In progress  Progress towards outcomes  1.1.1 Procurement tender for the replenishment of 20 first aid kits has been launched.  The process is on-going. An 
additional 10 first aid kits will now be procured and issued to the CR DRC committee in Mont NGafula, which is 
included in the DREF operation.  1.1.2 First aid was provided during the evacuation of affected people (pregnant women, elderly, children, and people with 
disabilities) from flooded to non-flooded locations. In total, 49 CR DRC volunteers were mobilized to support first aid 
activities as the situation required.    
1.1.3 Procurement tender for the purchase of 1,000 mosquito nets has been launched and the process is on-going. An  additional 750 mosquito nets will now be procured for distribution in neighbourhoods in Mont NGafula, which are now 
included in the DREF operation.  Water, sanitation and hygiene promotion  Outcome 1: Immediate risk of  waterborne disease is reduced  through the provision of improved  water, sanitation and hygiene  promotion in flood-affected areas of  Democratic Republic of Congo, over  a period of four months    Outputs   % of  achievement  Output 1.1: Target population is provided with access to  safe water supply (New target: 5,115 people (875 families) 
In progress  Output 1.2: Target population is provided with adequate  environmental sanitation measures (New target: 5,115  people (875 families)  In progress    Output 1.3: Target population is provided with hygiene  promotion, which meets SPHERE standards (New target:  5,115 people (875 families)  100%  Activities     Is implementation on  time? 
% progress  (estimate)     Yes No  1.1.1 Procure/distribute water treatment chemicals (New target: 5,115 
people (875 families)   X In progress  1.2.1 Procure environmental sanitation materials and protective 
equipment   X In progress  1.2.2 Establish community sanitation communities (New target: nine 
communities - one committee /district   X In progress  1.2.3 Conduct environmental sanitation campaigns  X 25%  1.3.1 Training of volunteers on health and hygiene promotion and the use 
of IEC materials (New target: 60 volunteers + 10 supervisors)  X  50%  1.3.2 Production of information, education and communication materials 
(New target: 10,000 posters, 10,000 leaflets and 20 image boxes)   X In progress  1.3.3 Conduct health and hygiene promotion through house to house 
approach (New target: 5,115 people (875 families)  100%  In progress       1.3.4 Procure/distribute of hygiene related NFls comprising buckets 
(one pc per family), hygiene/dignity kits (one pc per family), jerry 
cans (one pc per family) and soap (10 pcs per family); and provide 
sensitization on their use (New target: 865 families)   X In progress  Progress towards outcomes  1.1.1 Procurement tender for the purchase of water treatment chemicals has been launched and the process is on-
going (expected to be completed w/c 15 February 2016). Additional chemicals will be procured to treat water 
sources in neighbourhoods in Mont NGafula, which are now included in the DREF operation. 
  1.1.2 Procurement tender for the purchase of environmental sanitation materials and protective equipment has been 
launched and the process is on-going (expected to be completed w/c 15 February 2016). Additional materials will 
be procured (atomizers and fumigators etc.) to meet the needs in neighbourhoods in Mont NGafula, which are 
now included in the DREF operation.  
  1.1.3 Standard procedures for the community sanitation communities have been developed, and identification of the 
members is in progress in collaboration with the target population. An additional five committees will be 
established in neighbourhoods in Mont NGafula, which are now included in the DREF operation. 
  1.2.1 Environmental sanitation campaigns are pending the purchase of materials (refer to Activity 1.2.1 and Activity 
1.2.2). 
  1.3.1 In total, 30 CR DRC volunteers, and five supervisors have received training on health and hygiene promotion 
using IEC materials (including community communication techniques), which equates to 50 per cent of the new 
target (New target: 60 volunteers + 10 supervisors) as an additional 30 volunteers and five supervisors will be 
trained in neighbourhoods in Mont NGafula, which are now included the DREF operation.  
  1.3.2 Procurement tender for the purchase of IEC materials been launched; and the process is on-going (expected to 
be completed w/c 15 February 2016). Additional IECs will be procured for distribution in neighbourhoods in Mont 
NGafula, which are now included the DREF operation.  
  1.3.3 In total, 12,070 people (2,478 men, 5,529 women and 3,793 children) have been reached by health and hygiene 
promotion through a house to house approach in the four neighbourhood, which exceeds the intended target 
(2,500 people), and is also on-going. 
  1.3.4 Procurement tender for the purchase of hygiene related NFIs materials been launched; and the process is on-
going (expected to be completed w/c 15 February 2016); and will be distribution in collaboration with the 
Government authorities to ensure coordinated action and avoid duplication. Additional hygiene related NFIs will be 
procured for distribution in neighbourhoods in Mont NGafula, which are now included the DREF operation.  Shelter and settlements  Outcome 1:  Immediate shelter and  settlement needs of the target  population in flood-affected areas of  DRC are met over a period of four  months  Outputs  % of achievement  Output 1.1:  Target population is provided with Non-Food 
Items (NFls) and emergency shelter items (New target:  5,115 people (875 families) 
57%  Activities     Is implementation on  time? 
% progress  (estimate)     Yes  No   1.1.1 Through consultation process define the appropriate emergency 
shelter design and bill of quantity   X  100%  1.1.2 Procure/distribute NFIs in accordance with IFRC procurement 
standards (blankets (two pcs per family), kitchen sets (one pc per 
family), mats (two pcs per family) (New target: 875 families).   X In progress  1.1.3 Procure/distribute emergency shelter items (construction tool for 
volunteers timber, construction consumables, tarpaulins (3 pcs per 
HH) construction tool (1 pcs per HH)) (Target: 242 families).  *New activity included through this Operations Update.   X In progress  1.1.4 Training of volunteers on use of shelter tool kit, and distribution 
techniques (New target: 60 volunteers + 10 supervisors)  X  50%    
  D. Budget 
See attached revised budget. 
 
     1.1.5 Mobilization of volunteers to provide demonstration/sensitization on 
temporary shelter construction (New target: 60 volunteers)   X In progress  1.1.6 Shelter project evaluation  X  0%  Progress towards outcomes   
1.1.1 CR DRC in collaboration with the RDRT shelter carried out an assessment of the 500 families targeted through the DREF  operation, to identify those 250 families that were most in need of temporary shelter assistance. In total, 114 families in 
KingabuaNdanu and KingabuaPecheur neighbourhoods were identified to be most in need. Given that the shelter budget 
line in the initial DREF allocation provides for shelters for 179 families (refer to Needs analysis and scenario planning), 
additional resources are required to ensure that the most vulnerable families in the Kimbondo, Kindele and Masanga-
Mbila and Ngansele neighbourhoods (128 families) can be supported.  
  1.1.2 In total, 500 families received NFIs in Debonhome, KingabuaNdanu, KingabuaPcheur and Salongo neighbourhoods, 
which equates to 57 per cent of the new target (875 families).  An additional 375 families will receive NFIs in 
neighbourhoods in Mont NGafula, which are now included in the DREF operation. 
  1.1.3 Reorientation of the proposed strategy for emergency strategy has been completed; and is incorporated in the revised 
EPoA through the Operations Update. In total 242 families will receive assistance. Procurement tender for requisition of 
shelter construction items has been launched; and the process is on-going (expected to be completed w/c 22 February 
2016) 
  1.1.4 In total, 30 volunteers and five supervisors received technical and practical training on the techniques of shelter building 
and distribution, which equates to 50 per cent of the new target (New target: 60 volunteers + 10 supervisors); as an 
additional 30 volunteers and five supervisors will be trained in  neighbourhoods in Mont NGafula, which are now included 
the DREF operation. 
  1.1.5 The CR DRC volunteers trained in shelter building and distribution techniques are now mobilized and able to support in 
temporary shelter construction. 
  1.1.6 An evaluation of the shelter activities will be carried out at the end of the DREF operation as part of the operational 
review exercise.      