                       
Flooded areas in Kingabwa neighbourhood  DRC RC    DREF Operation n MDRCD016 Operations Update no. 2  Date of issue:  4 April 2016 Timeframe covered by this update:  10 February  2016 to 23 March  2016  Overall budget allocation:     Original allocation: CHF 191,646   Additional allocation n 1: CHF 98,979   Total allocation: CHF 290,625  Operations timeframe: Five months (new end date: 7  May 2016)  Host National Society presence (volunteers, staff, branches): Branches covering the districts of Debonhomme,  KingabuaNdanu, KingabuaPcheur and Salongo neighbourhoods of Kinshasa, plus those covering the new  municipalities of Kindele, Kimbondo, Masanga-Mbila and Ngansele neighbourhoods in the Mont NGafula  municipality. The National Society will cover 3 staff, 4 NDRTs, 10 supervisors, and 60 volunteers for this operation.  Red Cross Red Crescent Movement partners actively involved in the operation: Belgian Red Cross, Canadian  Red Cross, International Committee of the Red Cross, International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent  Societies, Spanish Red Cross and Swedish Red Cross  Other partner organizations actively involved in the operation: None    This Operations Update requests an extension of timeframe of one month (New end date: 7 May 2016) to  enable an operational review and a finance analyst mission to support closure of the operation.     A. Situation analysis  Description of the disaster    Since mid-November 2015, extensive rainfall in the  Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) has led to flooding  across the country. On 6 December, the heavy rains led to  the overflow of the Ndjili River causing flooding in the  Debonhome, KingabuaNdanu, KingabuaPcheur and  Salongo neighbourhoods of the capital Kinshasa, affecting  10,560 people (2,112 families) and resulting in 31 deaths and  numerous injuries. The processing centre of the Water  Distribution Authority serving Kinshasa along the river Ndjili  was damaged, reducing the available safe water supply. As  of 10 February 2016, the waters had receded in the  Debonhomme and Salongo neighbourhoods; however the  neighbourhoods of Kingabua Pecheur and KingabuaNdanu  are still flooded, obliging the population of these two  neighbourhoods to use canoes as means of transportation.  Other municipalities in Kinshasa have also been affected by  the floods, following heavy rains, which have continued throughout January and February, including in Massina, Mont  NGafula and Ngaliema.     Emergency Plan of Action operation update  Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods    
NFI distribution in Limt municipality  DRC RC  On 19 December 2015, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) released CHF  191,646 from the Disaster Relief Emergency Fund (DREF)  to support the Red Cross of the Democratic Republic of  the Congo respond to the needs of the affected population in  the in the Debonhome, Kingabua Ndanu, Kingabua Pcheur  and Salongo neighbourhoods of Kinshasa. A first extension  request was approved to extend the DREF operation to the  new neighbourhoods of Kindele, Kimbondo, Masanga-Mbila 
and Ngansele in the Mont NGafula municipality. As such,  updated DREF operation aimed to support a total of 5,115  people (875 families). Planned activities in the municipalities  of Limt and Matt are near completion and intervention  in the Mont Ngafula has been launched.      This Operations Update requests an extension of timeframe  of one month (new end date: 7 May 2016) to enable an  operational review and a finance analyst mission to support closure of the operation. Please refer to Operations  Update no.1 for more detailed information on the DREF operation.    The major donors and partners of the DREF include the Red Cross Societies and governments of Australia, Austria,  Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Monaco, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden  and the USA, as well as DG ECHO, the UK Department for International Development (DFID) the Medtronic and  Zurich Foundations and other corporate and private donors. The IFRC, on behalf of the Red Cross Society of  Democratic Republic of Congo would like to extend many thanks to all partners for their generous contributions.         