                        DREF operation Operation n MDRCD016  Date of Issue: 20 September 2016 Date of disaster: 6 December 2015  Operation start date: 18 December 2015 Operation end date: 7 May 2016  Host National Society: Branches covering the districts of 
Debonhomme, Kingabua Ndanu, Kingabua Pcheur and 
Salongo neighbourhoods of Kinshasa, plus those covering 
the new municipalities of Kindele, Kimbondo, Masanga-Mbila 
and Ngansele neighbourhoods in the Mont NGafula 
municipality. The National Society will cover 3 staff, 4 
NDRTs, 10 supervisors, and 60 volunteers for this operation.    Operation budget: CHF 290,625  Number of people affected: 10,560 people (2,112 families) Number of people assisted: 5,115 persons (875 
families)  N of National Societies involved in the operation: 6 National Societies, namely DRC Red Cross, Belgian Red Cross, 
Canadian Red Cross, Spanish Red Cross and Swedish Red Cross.  N of other partner organizations involved in the operation: The operation was also supported by the International 
Committee of the Red Cross and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.    A. Situation analysis  Description of the disaster   
Intensive rains in the DRC, starting from mid-November 2015, caused flooding across the country. As of 6 December 2015, 
these torrential rains caused the overflowing of the Ndjili and Congo Rivers, causing flooding in the municipalities of Limet 
(in Kingabua Ndanu and Kingabua Pecheur neighbourhoods) and Matete (Debonhome and Salongo neighbourhoods) in 
Kinshasa. Some 10,560 people were affected (2,112 families), while 31 deaths and several injuries were recorded. An 
estimated 1,696 families (8,480 people) were displaced, having lost their homes and property following the floods. They 
were thus obliged to live in proximity within host families in neighbourhoods around the affected areas. 
 
Amongst the destructions caused by the floods, was the damage of the water treatment centre of the Water Distribution 
Authority located on the banks of the Ndjili River, which supplies water to the city, resulting in lack of drinking water for the 
population. 
 
Although the floods receded in some neighbourhoods of Matete (Debonhomme and Salongo), part of Limet 
neighbourhoods (Kingabua Pecheur and Kingabua Ndanu) remained under water, making the people in these areas turn 
to the use of canoes for movement. Other municipalities of Kinshasa, including Mont Ngafula, Ngaliema and Masina were 
also affected and the evaluation conducted in Mont - Ngafula provided key information (contained in Table 2 below), which 
led to the extension of the operation and expansion of activities to the Kindele, Kimbondo, Masanga-Mbila and Ngansele 
neighbourhoods of Mont Ngafula, to assist an additional 2,615 people (375 families). 
 
The floods were also reported in other provinces as seen in the following Table: 
 
   Emergency Plan of Action Final Report  Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods   P a g e  | 2    DREF Operation plan Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods- Final Report   
Table 1: Affected provinces and damages recorded   
PROVINCES LOCALITIES DAMAGE  Tshopo    
Banalia, Isangi, Yakusu, Basoko, 
Alimbongo, Yahuma, Tshopo, 
Mangobo, Makiso, Lubunga, 
Ubundu Wanierukula, Yabaondo, 
Yahisuli  Data not confirmed  Maniema:    
Kindu, Punia, Lubutu, Kasongo, 
Kailo and Kibombo  - 600 affected households or 65,500 people 
- 08 schools destroyed 
- 03 deaths 
- Loss of crops (1,074 ha) and household items  Equateur Mbandaka 819 affected households, that is 6,173 people  Mongala:  Bumba 7,661 affected households, that is 45966 people  Tsuapa:  Boende Data not confirmed  Haut - Ul:    
Bangadi, Dungu and Niangara Data not confirmed  Sud-Kivu: Idjwi, Kalehe, Shabunda, Mwenga, 
Walungu, Bukavu  In the city of Bukavu: 
- 25 deaths  
- 11 injured 
- 190 destroyed houses 
- Destroyed farms  In Kabar: 14 completely destroyed houses 
In Mwenga: 33 completely destroyed houses and 85 
partially destroyed others  Kongo-Central:    
  Inkisi, Boma and Mbanza Ngungu In Boma: 103 completely destroyed houses, 05 
deaths  
In Mbanza Ngungu: Completely destroyed houses, 
making some families homeless; damaged NFIs and 
4 people have found death in the rubbles of their 
homes.  Nord-Kivu:  Masisi (Bulwa) Over 500 collapsed and flooded houses, 02 schools 
destroyed, destroyed fields, 08 deaths and thirty 
persons reported missing  Haut Lomamie:  Bukama Data not confirmed  Tanganyika Moba and Soswa (Nyunzu) Data not confirmed   
 
After the launching of the operation, the Red Cross of DRC conducted a detailed assessment of the situation, which led to 
the revision of the EPoA and timeframe (see Operations Update No 1). Operations update No 2 further extended the 
timeframe of the operation to enable an operational review and a finance analyst mission to support closure of the operation 
(see Operations Update No 2). 
 
The major donors and partners of the DREF include the Red Cross Societies and governments of Australia, Austria, 
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Monaco, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden and the 
USA, as well as DG ECHO, the UK Department for International Development (DFID) the Medtronic and Zurich Foundations 
and other corporate and private donors. The IFRC, on behalf of the Red Cross Society of DRC would like to extend many 
thanks to all partners for their generous contributions. 
  <click here for the contact details and here for final financial report> 
  Summary of response   
Overview of Host National Society 
The Red Cross Society of the Democratic Republic of Congo (RC DRC) has long experience in managing and responding 
to natural disasters (volcanic eruptions, landslides, floods, population movements, etc.) and armed conflict. In the health 
sector, the RC DRC has experienced three Ebola outbreaks and cholera epidemics, which remain endemic in certain 
localities. Intervention measures have been implemented in recent years for measles, polio and Marburg. 
  Source: Local RC committees    http://adore.ifrc.org/Download.aspx?FileId=125047
http://adore.ifrc.org/Download.aspx?FileId=130136 
P a g e  | 3    DREF Operation plan Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods- Final Report  The RC DRC is a neutral humanitarian organization auxiliary to the public authorities, which has a pool of approx. 160,000 
volunteers (one of the largest voluntary networks in the world). The RC DRC has provincial disaster response intervention 
teams (PDRT) with 110 members, a national disaster response intervention teams (NDRT) with 30 members, and 10 staff 
members that are regional disaster response team (RDRT) trained. 
 
In response to the flooding, the RC DRC targeted four areas of intervention namely emergency shelter, sanitation and 
hygiene promotion, distribution of non-food items and disaster preparedness and capacity building of the National Society. 
All these interventions were carried out for the benefit of all 875 most vulnerable households in the three affected 
municipalities of Kinshasa (Matete, Limete and Mont Ngafula) targeted by this operation. The RC DRC mobilized 146 
volunteers, who carried out assessments, first aid, evacuation, search and rescue, as well as environmental sanitation 
(drainage of houses), and health and hygiene promotion (e.g. on the risk of epidemics). 
 
Overview of Red Cross Red Crescent Movement in country 
At the onset of the disaster, Movement coordination meetings were held with IFRC, ICRC, and partner National Societies 
in the country, including the Belgian Red Cross, the French Red Cross, the Swedish Red Cross and the Spanish Red Cross. 
The RC DRC informed partners of developments during Movement meetings, until the end of the operation. 
 
Overview of non-RCRC actors in country 
The Government set up a floods crisis committee under the Prime Minister`s office. The committee conducted assessments 
in four of the affected provinces (Tshopo; Kongo Central, Kinshasa and Equateur), although only one (Kinshasa) was 
validated. In addition, to the assessment conducted under the Prime Minister`s office the Ministry of Social Affairs and 
Humanitarian Action also carried out evaluation and monitoring missions. 
 
Non-governmental humanitarian actors, held coordination meetings which were organized under the lead of OCHA. During 
these meetings, data was analysed, and statistics from the provinces were equally updated. 
  Needs analysis and scenario planning   
Needs analysis 
Following the launch of the operation, RC DRC volunteers, two RDRTs (Assessment/Logistics and Shelter profiles) and the 
RC DRC NHQ staff, conducted an assessment of the situation, which informed the design and revision of the DREF 
operation (see Operations Update No. 1 for information on the findings of the assessment). 
 
In total, the DREF operation targeted 5,115 people (875 households in Kinshasa), selected based on their level of 
vulnerability, including displaced households (whose homes were destroyed), the chronically ill, elderly, female-headed 
households, lactating mothers and pregnant women, children under-five and/or people with disabilities. The RC DRC 
ensured that the DREF operation was aligned with the IFRCs commitment to gender equality and diversity. Other aspects 
considered included prevention of sexual and gender-based violence and the protection of children. 
 
Risk Analysis 
Aside from the fear of continuous downpour, which would have impeded on the success of the operation, there were no 
major risks for this operation. 
  B. Operational strategy and plan    Overall Objective   
Immediate survival needs of the flood-affected population are met through the provision of essential emergency relief, 
shelter, health, water, and sanitation and hygiene promotion assistance, targeting a total of 5,115 people1 (875 families) 
over a five months 
 
* An additional 2,615 people (375 families) and a two-months timeframe extension were included through Operations 
Update 1.  
** Additional neighbourhoods of Kimbondo, Kindele, Masanga-Mbila and Ngansele in the Mont NGafula municipality 
included through Operations Update 1.                                                        
1 The DREF Operation targeted households in the Debonhome, Kimbondo, Kindele, KingabuaNdanu, KingabuaPcheur, Masanga-Mbila, Ngansele and 
Salongo neighbourhoods of Kinshasa   P a g e  | 4    DREF Operation plan Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods- Final Report  *** Additional timeframe extension of one month in Operations update 2 to enable an operational review and a finance 
analyst mission to support closure of the operation. 
 
The overall objective of the operation has been met in the sense that all targeted beneficiaries received the planned relief 
assistance. 
  Proposed strategy   
Activities planned under this DREF operation, were expanded in Operations Update 1, to include the following actions:   Conducting a detailed needs and gap assessment and analysis in consultation with relevant partners and 
beneficiaries with the intention of revising and monitoring the relevance of the EPoA;   Replenishment of first aid kits used by volunteers in the initial response to enable first aid services continue to be 
provided to the affected population. An additional 10 kits were procured for the Red Cross committee in Mont 
Ngafula.    Procurement/distribution of insecticide-treated, long-lasting mosquito nets (two pcs per family) to reduce the risk of 
malaria (new target: 875 families).   Procurement/distribution of water treatment chemicals (aqua tabs) to enable household water treatment, as well as 
the provision of products for cholera treatment (oral rehydration sachets). Targeted families received aqua tabs to 
provide them with safe water supply at household level, while community water sources were equally treated (new 
target: 875 families).   Procurement of environmental sanitation materials (brushes, bleach, chlorine, detergent, hoes, mixing containers, 
rakes, soap, sprayers and wheel barrows) and protective equipment (boots, gloves, helmets, nose covers and 
protective suits) for 60 volunteers and community sanitation committees (new target: nine committees) which were 
established and responsible for cleaning the drains and gutters in their communities. Additional sanitation 
equipment (e.g. atomizers and fumigators), which were not budgeted in the initial DREF allocation were also 
required. It should be noted that sanitation materials were used during the DREF operation and left with the RC 
DRC local committees for activities to continue beyond the timeframe of the DREF operation.    Training of volunteers and supervisors on health and hygiene promotion (new target: 60 volunteers + 10 
supervisors), including an additional 30 volunteers and five supervisors, as required, to enable the extension of 
activities into the new communities. Following training, volunteers and supervisors were mobilized to carry out 
health and hygiene promotion outreach activities within the affected communities. Additional information, education 
and communication (IEC) materials were also required (image boxes, leaflets and posters, megaphones and 
batteries).    Procurement/distribution of hygiene related NFIs comprising buckets (one pc per family), hygiene/dignity kits (one 
pc per family), jerry cans (one pc per family) and soap (10 bars per family) and provision sensitization on their use 
(new target: 875 families).    Training of volunteers and supervisors (on use of shelter kits and distribution techniques (new target: 60 volunteers 
+ 10 supervisors). An additional 30 volunteers and five supervisors were required to extend activities into the new 
communities and ensure that the shelter needs of the families targeted were addressed as quickly as possible. 
Following the training, volunteers and supervisors were mobilized to support the most vulnerable households with 
the construction of temporary shelter.    Procurement/distribution of NFIs target families comprising blankets (two pcs per family), kitchen sets (one pc per 
family), mats (two pcs per family) - (new target: 875).    Procurement/distribution of a cover shelter kit to families (new target: 242 families) identified following 
assessments, as requiring emergency shelter assistance, to cover immediate needs until more appropriate support 
could be provided. The cover shelter kit comprised three tarpaulins, roofing nails and tips, a 30m rope and tools 
(e.g. hammer etc.). The RC DRC was in charge of providing technical assistance on the use of tarpaulins during 
distribution and offered on-the-spot support to the most vulnerable (single women, the elderly) in building their 
shelters.    A DREF operational review/lessons workshop was conducted to capture lessons learnt, and inform 
recommendations for future IFRC and NS operations.    Operational support services   
Please refer to the original EPoA, which provides an overview of the assistance from Operational support services required 
for this DREF operation  only changes to this strategy include the below: 
  Human resources (HR) 
   P a g e  | 5    DREF Operation plan Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods- Final Report  The DREF operation required the mobilization of the following personnel:   A Provincial Coordinator (Kinshasa) was designated to supervise the implementation of the DREF operation and a 
contribution was made to support his/her costs for a period of four months.    A Head of Operations was recruited for four months to act as a focal point for the DREF operation.   A NHQ Water and Sanitation officer was designated to support the implementation of the DREF operation (e.g. 
support with training etc.) for a period of 36 days. This officer was issued with a per diem and an allowance for 
accommodation.   Four NDRTs were designated to support the implementation of the DREF operation (e.g. support with training etc.) 
for a period of 36 days. Each NDRT was issued with a per diem and an allowance for accommodation.   Five supervisors were initially mobilized to support volunteers with planned activities for a period of 24 days (three 
days per week for 12 weeks). An additional five supervisors were mobilized after the DREF revision for activities 
planned in the neighbourhoods in Mont Ngafula, for a period of 12 days. Each supervisor received a daily per diem.   30 volunteers were mobilized to support the implementation of the DREF operation, for a period of 36 days (three 
days per week for 12 weeks). An additional 30 volunteers were mobilized for activities planned in Mont Ngafula, for 
a period of 12 days. Each volunteer received a daily per diem, as well as a Red Cross bib and rain jacket. Please 
note that volunteers involved in sanitation activities were provided with protective equipment (boots, gloves, 
helmets, protective suits, sanitizer etc.). As noted, the new communities were a considerable distance from those 
that were initial targeted, and as such these additional volunteers were required to ensure that planned activities 
could be completed as efficiently and effectively as possible.   A RC DRC driver was recruited for three months and security personnel was also hired for two months to ensure 
the safety and security of NFIs that were stored.   Following the late arrival of the two IFRC RDRTs due to challenges obtaining visa and other issues, there was a 
need to extend the duration of the RDRT (shelter) by one month to ensure the effective implementation of activities 
under the revised strategy for this sector (refer to Proposed strategy section)   An IFRC driver was also recruited for two months, and additional technical support was provided by the IFRC 
regional operations coordinator and finance assistant.    Logistics and supply chain 
 
The RC DRC logistics and supply chain department have weak procedures for emergencies and this greatly delayed the 
procurement/distribution of items required for this DREF operation. However, where possible pre-positioned stocks (e.g. 
IEC materials, megaphones etc.) were mobilized from National Society warehouses to enable volunteers to begin the health 
and hygiene promotion. IFRC thus worked closely with RC DRC to see how best to support the procurement of NFIs and 
other equipment for the response. 
  Communications 
 
In collaboration with the IFRC Central Africa office, the RC DRC ensured communication and visibility of the National Society 
operating in the affected areas. The RC DRC communications and PMER sections jointly organised a beneficiary 
satisfaction survey to know how the populations were feeling about the NS. The people surveyed indicated a very positive 
image of the Red Cross of DRC in relation with the floods operation. The survey, and all other activities carried out by the 
NS were relayed in national newspapers and television. 
  Security 
 
During the implementation of the operation DRC Red Cross volunteers were faced with tensions from some people who did 
not understand why they were not identified as beneficiaries of the operation. Following threats to the volunteers, the NS 
leadership had to come in to explain the criteria used to identify the most vulnerable among the affected populations. The 
communication from the NS was successful as it helped contain the tensions, giving room for the smooth implementation 
of the operation. 
  Planning, monitoring, evaluation, & reporting (PMER) 
 
An operational review was carried out to capture lessons learnt, and inform recommendations. Please note that this was 
carried out in accordance with the standardized DREF review tool kit.  
   P a g e  | 6    DREF Operation plan Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods- Final Report   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  C. DETAILED OPERATIONAL PLAN    Quality Programming / Areas Common to all Sectors  Outcome 1: Continuous and detailed assessment and analysis is used to inform the design and implementation 
of the DREF operation  Output 1.1: Rapid and detailed needs assessments are carried out to inform the preparation/revision of the 
Emergency Plan of Action; and continuous coordination with all stakeholders  Planned activities   1.1.1 Carry out detailed assessment in consultation with relevant partners  1.1.2 Revise Emergency Plan of Action based on analysis of assessment information  1.1.3 Monitoring of the activities planned by NHQ  1.1.4 Deployment of a Regional Disaster Response Team member  Achievements   
1.1.1. An initial assessment was conducted in the municipalities of Matete and Limete to understand the magnitude of  the flooding. This was done on the basis of pre-established criteria and 500 households were selected, that is 
125 households per municipality. A second assessment was jointly conducted with the RDRT deployed in the 
municipality of Mont Ngafula, following which 375 additional households were selected and added to the first list, 
bringing the total number to 875 households.  1.1.2 During the first assessment, an emergency plan of action was issued to carry out activities in the first two 
municipalities. Following conclusions of the second assessment, the action plan was revised to include data from 
the third municipality, Mont Ngafula;  1.1.3. The NS DM, PMER and SG conducted field monitoring activities, making sure that the action plan was respected, 
that RC response was of the best quality and also assessing the level of satisfaction of beneficiaries.  1.1.4. Two RDRTs (Assessment/Logistics and Shelter) were deployed by the IFRC to support the SN as part of this 
DREF operation.    Challenges     Lack of trained volunteers on rapid assessment in emergency situations;   Delay in the arrival of RDRTs did not allow the operation implementation deadline to be met.  Lessons learned      
PMER Officer of the DRC Red Cross conducting an interview to assess beneficiary 
satisfaction about the operation.  RC DRC     P a g e  | 7    DREF Operation plan Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods- Final Report    Health and Care  Outcome 2: Immediate risks to health are reduced through the provision of community based health services in 
flood-affected areas of Democratic Republic of Congo, over a period of five months  Output 1.1: Target population provided with access to community based health services, including provision of 
first aid; and distribution of mosquito nets (Target: 5,115 people (875 families))  Planned activities  2.1.1 Procurement/replenishment of first aid kits (Target: 50 kits)  2.1.2 Provide first aid services; and referral in flood-affected communities  2.1.3 Procure/distribution of mosquito nets; and provide sensitization on their use (Target: 500 families (2 pcs per 
family)  Achievements   
2.1.1. Some 30 first aid kits were purchased and made available to teams for assistance to the injured in the various  neighbourhoods affected by floods in Kinshasa. 
2.1.2. The injured persons were assisted by teams of first aid volunteers of the RC DRC, while the most serious cases  were transferred to the nearest health centres 
2.1.3. Some 1,750 mosquito nets were purchased and distributed to the targeted 875 affected households. First aid  volunteers sensitized recipients on the use of insecticide-treated mosquito nets and demonstrated how to tie 
them in their houses.    Challenges    Insufficient number of mosquito nets to fit the size of households resulting in distributions not meeting the Sphere  standards.    Lessons learned    The number of mosquito nets to be distributed per household to take into consideration the number of people in the  household and the unique characteristics whether having children under 5 years old, the elderly or pregnant women.      Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion  Outcome 3: Immediate risk of waterborne disease is reduced through the provision of improved water, sanitation 
and hygiene promotion in flood-affected areas of Democratic Republic of Congo, over a period of five months 
  Output 3.1: Target population is provided with improved access to safe water supply (Target: 5,115 people (875 
families)  Planned activities  3.1.1 Procure/distribute HH water treatment chemicals (aqua tab  two pcs per family for 60 days) including ORS; and 
provide training/demonstration on their use.  Achievements   
3.1.1. Some 1,750 packs of Aqua tabs and 8,750 pieces of ORS were purchased and distributed to 875 households;  60 volunteers were trained in communication and sanitation techniques, and conducted demonstrations sessions 
on the use of Aqua tabs and ORS; the trained first aid volunteers visited and provided support to 78 households 
whose heads of households were elderly people for two weeks, on the use of Aqua tabs and ORS.    Output 3.2: Target population is provided with adequate environmental sanitation measures (Target: 5,115  
people (875 families))  Planned activities  A better understanding of the scope of the disaster was made possible by data collected by volunteers living in the 
affected communities. It is therefore important to recruit volunteers locally in the disaster affected areas.  
   P a g e  | 8    DREF Operation plan Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods- Final Report  3.2.1 Procurement of environmental sanitation materials (Bleach, chlorine, containers (for mixing of chlorine, detergent, 
Hoes, soap, soft brushes, sprayers, rakes, wheelbarrows) and protective equipment (boots, gloves, helmets, nose 
guards, protective suits)  3.2.2 Establish community sanitation committees (Target: four committees - one committee /district  3.2.3 Conduct environmental sanitation campaigns  Achievements   
3.2.1. 500 cans of 5 litres of bleach, 20 tins of chlorine, 4 buckets (for mixing of chlorine and 500 boxes of detergent),  50 hoes, 160 bars of soap, 50 soft brushes, 4 sprayers, 50 rakes, 8 wheelbarrows, 30 working suits, 30 pairs of 
boots, 30 pairs of tough CTC gloves, 30 pairs of protective glasses and 90 nose cones were purchased and 
made available for volunteers to conduct sanitation campaigns.  3.2.2. 8 health committees were set up in the 8 neighbourhoods targeted by the RC DRC response (three (3) 
neighbourhoods in Limete, one (1) in Matete and four (4) in Mont Ngafula) each composed of five members, one 
(1) President, one (1) Vice President and three (3) members. These committees were provided with the above 
mentioned sanitation materials. Note that of the five persons making up each committee, three are members of 
the community and 2 are from the local coordination of the RC DRC. Equipment purchased are stored at the 
local coordination of the RC DRC.  3.2.3. Sanitation campaigns were conducted in all 8 neighbourhoods of 3 municipalities targeted by the Red Cross 
response; note that these campaigns covered the entire area of the 8 neighbourhoods and the 875 targeted 
households.    Challenges   
Lack of good quality sprayers and fumigators on the Kinshasa and unfortunately, the long logistics procedures for 
purchase abroad, did not allow us to buy these materials locally, resulting to non-expenditure related to the budget line 
for these purchases. 
  Lessons learned   
It is important to upgrade and increase quantity of stocks of fumigators and sprayers to avoid frequent breakdown of the 
old stock. 
  Output 3.3: Target population is provided with hygiene promotion, which meets SPHERE standards (Target: 
5,115 people (875 families))  Planned activities  3.3.1 Training of volunteers on health and hygiene promotion and the use of IEC materials (Target: 60 volunteers + 10 
volunteer supervisors)  3.3.2 Production of information, education and communication materials (Target: 5,000 posters, 5,000 leaflets, and 10 
image boxes)  3.3.3 Conduct health and hygiene promotion through house to house approach (Target: 875 families)  3.3.4 Procure/distribution of hygiene related NFIs comprising buckets (one pc per family), hygiene/dignity kits (one pc 
per family), jerry cans (one pc per family) and soap (10 pcs per family); and provide sensitization on their use (Target: 
875 families)  Achievements   P a g e  | 9    DREF Operation plan Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods- Final Report  3.3.1. 60 first aid volunteers were trained in sensitization techniques (30 in Matete 
and Limete municipalities and 30 others for the Mont Ngafula municipality). 
They were provided with leaflets and posters to accompany this campaign.  3.3.2. 5,000 posters, 5,000 leaflets and 10 images boxes were produced and 
distributed by the 60 first aid volunteers during the campaigns carried out in 
the 8 neighbourhoods of the three targeted municipalities.  3.3.3. Sanitation campaigns were coupled with hygiene promotion activities in all 8 
neighbourhoods, carried out with the door-to-door approach.  3.3.4. 875 households benefited from hygiene related non-food items including 
buckets (one per family), hygiene / dignity kits (one per family), jerry cans 
(one per family) and soap (10 bars family); and awareness on their use 
(target 875 families). The picture on the right shows a visibly satisfied NFI kit 
beneficiary. Photo by DRC Red Cross.  Challenges     Inadequate sanitation equipment for campaigns in the vast selected neighbourhoods (fumigators and sprayers);   Refusal of sanitation support by non-beneficiary populations 
  Lessons learned     Use of equipment available in RC DRC stock (fumigator and sprayer);   There is need to carryout sensitization of community with local political and administrative authorities, to facilitate 
acceptance by communities of the sanitation of their homes by the RC volunteers. 
    Shelter and Settlements  Outcome 4: Immediate shelter and settlement needs of the target population in flood-affected areas of DRC are 
met over a period of five months 
  Output 4.1: Target population is provided with Non-Food Items (NFIs) and emergency shelter items (Target: 5,115 
people (875 families)) 
  Planned activities  4.1.1 Through consultation process define the appropriate emergency shelter design and bill of quantity  4.1.2 Procure/distribute NFIs and emergency shelter items in accordance with IFRC procurement standards (blankets 
(two pcs per family), kitchen sets (one pc per family), mats (two pcs per family), nails (100g per family), local 
specification shelter kits - one tools kit and timber (one pc per family), tarpaulins (two pcs per family), slats (four 
pcs per family) timber (four pcs per family) (Target: 875 families)  4.1.3 Training of volunteers on use of shelter tool kit, and distribution techniques (Target: 60 volunteers + 10 supervisors) 
Mobilization of volunteers to provide demonstration/sensitization on temporary shelter construction (Target: 60 
volunteers)  4.1.4 Mobilization of volunteers to provide demonstration/sensitization on temporary shelter construction (Target: 60 
volunteers)  4.1.5. Shelter project evaluation 
  Achievements  4.1.1. The contribution of the shelter RDRT helped define the type of shelter needed and the amount of equipment 
necessary for their construction. For this purpose, a single slope model shelter was selected.  4.1.2. Blankets (two per family room), kitchen utensils (a piece per family), mats (two pieces per family), nails (100g per 
family) local specification shelter kits - a toolkit and wood (one PC per family), tarpaulins (two pieces per family), 
battens (four pcs per family) and wood (four pieces per family) were purchased and distributed to 286 families.   
Beneficiary who has received NFIs. 
 RC DRC   P a g e  | 10    DREF Operation plan Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods- Final Report  4.1.3. 60 first aid volunteers were trained on emergency shelter construction techniques, after which they demonstrated 
to beneficiary communities how to build emergency shelter and helped them in the process to build their 
temporary homes.   4.1.4. A total of 286 shelters were built - 128 in Mont Ngafula and 158 in Limete by beneficiaries, with support from 60 
first aid volunteers trained for this purpose. after the assessment, it was realized that the affected population of 
Matete did not need shelters, but NFIs and WASH related activities.  4.1.5. A joint team (IFRC, Swedish Red Cross and DRC Red Cross) visited the emergency shelters constructed and 
met the beneficiaries of these shelters to measure their level of satisfaction;     Challenges    Conflicts between landlords and tenants, beneficiaries of emergency shelters were recorded, on the construction of  these shelters on their lands.    Lessons learned    There is need to involve all stakeholders at the onset of shelter construction to avoid potential conflict between tenants  and landlords. The land owners of areas were houses had crumbled in Mont Ngafula were sensitized on the importance  of this humanitarian aid for their tenants, and their approvals were gotten for the construction of emergency shelters for  the benefit of affected tenants.     
  D. THE BUDGET 
 
Regarding the variances that can be observed in the final financial report, they are explained as NS booking errors, 
additional costs for the Finance Officer who supported the operation, unanticipated administrative costs such as fees for 
invitation letters, variation in exchange rates between the Swiss franc, Congolese franc and US dollar. A balance of CHF 
8,531 will be returned to the DREF (see the final financial report for details). 
                
Demonstration on shelter construction and model shelter used for this operation.  RC DRC     DREF Operation plan Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods- Final Report    