











































 
Flooded areas in Kingabwa neighbourhood © DRC RC 

 

DREF Operation n° MDRCD016 Operations Update no. 2 

Date of issue:  4 April 2016 Timeframe covered by this update:  10 February 

2016 to 23 March  2016 

Overall budget allocation:   

 Original allocation: CHF 191,646 

 Additional allocation n° 1: CHF 98,979 

 Total allocation: CHF 290,625 

Operations timeframe: Five months (new end date: 7 

May 2016) 

Host National Society presence (volunteers, staff, branches): Branches covering the districts of Debonhomme, 

KingabuaNdanu, KingabuaPécheur and Salongo neighbourhoods of Kinshasa, plus those covering the new 

municipalities of Kindele, Kimbondo, Masanga-Mbila and Ngansele neighbourhoods in the Mont N'Gafula 

municipality. The National Society will cover 3 staff, 4 NDRTs, 10 supervisors, and 60 volunteers for this operation. 

Red Cross Red Crescent Movement partners actively involved in the operation: Belgian Red Cross, Canadian 

Red Cross, International Committee of the Red Cross, International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent 

Societies, Spanish Red Cross and Swedish Red Cross 

Other partner organizations actively involved in the operation: None 

 

This Operations Update requests an extension of timeframe of one month (New end date: 7 May 2016) to 

enable an operational review and a finance analyst mission to support closure of the operation.  

 

A. Situation analysis 

Description of the disaster 

 

Since mid-November 2015, extensive rainfall in the 

Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) has led to flooding 

across the country. On 6 December, the heavy rains led to 

the overflow of the N'djili River causing flooding in the 

Debonhome, KingabuaNdanu, KingabuaPécheur and 

Salongo neighbourhoods of the capital Kinshasa, affecting 

10,560 people (2,112 families) and resulting in 31 deaths and 

numerous injuries. The processing centre of the Water 

Distribution Authority serving Kinshasa along the river N'djili 

was damaged, reducing the available safe water supply. As 

of 10 February 2016, the waters had receded in the 

Debonhomme and Salongo neighbourhoods; however the 

neighbourhoods of Kingabua Pecheur and KingabuaNdanu 

are still flooded, obliging the population of these two 

neighbourhoods to use canoes as means of transportation. 

Other municipalities in Kinshasa have also been affected by 

the floods, following heavy rains, which have continued throughout January and February, including in Massina, Mont 

N’Gafula and Ngaliema. 

  

Emergency Plan of Action operation update 

Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods 



 
NFI distribution in Limété municipality © DRC RC 

On 19 December 2015, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) released CHF 

191,646 from the Disaster Relief Emergency Fund (DREF) 

to support the Red Cross of the Democratic Republic of 

the Congo respond to the needs of the affected population in 

the in the Debonhome, Kingabua Ndanu, Kingabua Pécheur 

and Salongo neighbourhoods of Kinshasa. A first extension 

request was approved to extend the DREF operation to the 

new neighbourhoods of Kindele, Kimbondo, Masanga-Mbila 
and Ngansele in the Mont N'Gafula municipality. As such, 

updated DREF operation aimed to support a total of 5,115 

people (875 families). Planned activities in the municipalities 

of Limété and Matété are near completion and intervention 

in the Mont Ngafula has been launched. 

 

 

This Operations Update requests an extension of timeframe 

of one month (new end date: 7 May 2016) to enable an 

operational review and a finance analyst mission to support closure of the operation. Please refer to Operations 

Update no.1 for more detailed information on the DREF operation. 

 

The major donors and partners of the DREF include the Red Cross Societies and governments of Australia, Austria, 

Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Monaco, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden 

and the USA, as well as DG ECHO, the UK Department for International Development (DFID) the Medtronic and 

Zurich Foundations and other corporate and private donors. The IFRC, on behalf of the Red Cross Society of 

Democratic Republic of Congo would like to extend many thanks to all partners for their generous contributions.  

  



 

Contact information 
For further information specifically related to this operation please contact: 
 

 DRC Red Cross: M. Dominique Lutula Kitoko; President of the DRC Red Cross; phone:(243) 
818801480;email: sgcrrdc@gmail.com  

 

 IFRC Regional Representation: Denis Duffaut, Regional Representative for Central Africa; Yaoundé; phone: 
(office) +237 22 21 74 37; (mobile) +237 77 11 77 97; fax: +237 22 21 74 39; email: denis.duffaut@ifrc.org  

 

 IFRC Africa Region: Farid Abdulkadir, Head of Disaster Management Unit, Nairobi, Kenya; phone +254 731 
067 489; email: farid.aiywar@ifrc.org 

 

 IFRC Geneva: Christine South, Operations Quality Assurance Senior Officer; phone: +41.22.730.45 29; 
email: christine.south@ifrc.org 

 

 IFRC Africa Region: Rishi Ramrakha, Head of zone logistics unit; Tel:+254 733 888 022/ Fax +254 20 271 
2777; email: rishi.ramrakha@ifrc.org 

 
For Resource Mobilization and Pledges:  

 

 In IFRC Africa Region: Fidelis Kangethe, Partnerships and Resource Mobilization Coordinator; Addis Ababa; 
phone: +251 930 03 4013; email: fidelis.kangethe@ifrc.org 

 
Please send all pledges for funding to zonerm.africa@ifrc.org 

 
For Performance and Accountability (planning, monitoring, evaluation and reporting):  

 IFRC Africa Region: Robert Ondrusek, PMER Coordinator Africa, phone: +254 731 067277; email: 
robert.ondrusek@ifrc.org  

 

How we work  

All IFRC assistance seeks to adhere to the Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent 

Movement and Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) in Disaster Relief and the Humanitarian Charter and 

Minimum Standards in Humanitarian Response (Sphere) in delivering assistance to the most vulnerable. 

The IFRC’s vision is to inspire, encourage, facilitate and promote at all times all forms of humanitarian 

activities by National Societies, with a view to preventing and alleviating human suffering, and thereby 

contributing to the maintenance and promotion of human dignity and peace in the world. 

 

 

 

mailto:sgcrrdc@gmail.com
mailto:denis.duffaut@ifrc.org
mailto:farid.aiywar@ifrc.org
mailto:christine.south@ifrc.org
mailto:rishi.ramrakha@ifrc.org
mailto:fidelis.kangethe@ifrc.org
mailto:zonerm.africa@ifrc.org
mailto:robert.ondrusek@ifrc.org

