










































 

 

A. Situation analysis 

 

Description of the disaster  

 
In the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), extensive 

rainfall since mid-November 2015 has led to flooding 

across the country. On 6 December 2015, the 

acceleration of rains led to the overflow of the N'djili River 

causing flooding in the Debonhome, Kingabua Ndanu, 

Kingabua Pécheur and Salongo neighbourhoods of the 

capital Kinshasa, affecting 10,560 people (2,112 families); 

resulting in 31 deaths, and numerous injuries. An 

estimated 1,696 families (8,480) families have been 

displaced, after they lost their homes and property 

following the floods, and are now living in crowded 

conditions with host families (refer to “Table 1: Distribution 

of displaced population” for breakdown). The Processing 

Centre of the Water Distribution Authority serving 

Kinshasa along the river N'djili was damaged, which has reduced the available safe water supply, while 

sanitation structures have been blocked meaning that flood waters have not receded (buildings remain 

submerged),  increasing the risk of epidemics.   According to the DRC WEATHER Meteorologists, the rains will 

continue to fall until the end of December 2015, and the situation is therefore expected to worsen. Floods have 

also been observed in the provinces of Central Kongo, Bas Congo and Équateur; however information in these 

areas has not been verified.  

 

 

 

 

DREF Operation  n° MDRCD016  

Date of issue:  19 December 2015 Date of disaster: 6 December 2015 

Operation manager (responsible for this 
EPoA): Josuaneflore Tene; IFRC Central Africa; 
Operations coordinator 

Point of contact: Moise Kabongo Ngalulu, Democratic 
Republic of Congo Red Cross,  Disaster Management 
Officer 

Operation start date: 18 December 2015 Expected timeframe: Two months 

Overall operation budget: CHF 191,646 

Number of people affected: 10,560 people 
(2,112 families) 

Number of people to be assisted: 2,500 people (500 
people). 

Host National Society presence (n° of volunteers, staff, branches):    Red Cross of Democratic Republic 
of Congo 
Red Cross Red Crescent Movement partners actively involved in the operation (if available and 
relevant): Belgian Red Cross, Canadian Red Cross, International Federation of Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Societies  Spanish Red Cross, and Swedish Red Cross.  
Other partner organizations actively involved in the operation:  None 

DREF Operation 

Democratic Republic of Congo: Floods 

 Flooding in the DRC capital of Kinshasa /Photo CR 
DRC 



 | 2 P a g e

 

Summary of the current response 

 
Overview of Host National Society 

The Red Cross of the Democratic Republic of Congo (CR DRC) is a neutral humanitarian organization auxiliary 

to the public authorities, which has a pool of approx. 159,000 volunteers (one of the largest voluntary networks 

in the world). The CR DRC has provincial disaster response intervention teams (PDRT) with 110 members, a 

national disaster response intervention teams (NDRT) with 30 members, and 10 staff members that are regional 

disaster response team (RDRT) trained. Following the flooding in Kinshasa (on 6 December 2015), CR DRC 

mobilized 146 volunteers, who have carried out assessment, first aid, evacuation, search and rescue, as well as 

environmental sanitation (drainage of houses), and health and hygiene promotion (e.g. on the risk of 

epidemics).  

 

Since 2013, DREF operations have been carried out in response to a Population Movement (MDRCD014) and 

response to an Ebola Virus Disease outbreak (MDRCD015) – as such the National Society (NS) will ensure that 

any lessons learned from these operations are applied (as relevant) in the response to the floods.  

 

 
Overview of Red Cross Red Crescent Movement in country 

The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) have an in country presence in 

DRC, comprising two national staff, which are assisted by the Central Africa office located in Yaoundé, 

Cameroon, and the Africa regional office, which is based in Nairobi, Kenya. On 10 December 2015, the 

flooding, an alert was issued using the IFRC disaster management information system (DMIS).  On 11 

December 2015, an operational strategy call was convened with colleagues from the Central Africa office, 

Africa region and Geneva level. It was agreed that an allocation should be made from the Disaster Relief 

Emergency Fund (DREF) to support the costs of the response to date, a more detailed assessment, as well as 

assistance to 500 families (2,500 people). 

 

Partner National Societies (PNS) include the Belgian Red Cross, Canadian Red Cross, Spanish Red Cross 

and Swedish Red Cross. In addition, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) also has extensive 

presence in DRC. A Movement coordination meeting was convened with all partners to inform them of the 

situation; however as of 16 December 2015 there has been no offer of assistance forthcoming. In addition, with 

support from the IFRC, the CR DRC is developing several other projects in the DRC, including WASH and 

community health interventions in the Equateur province, a Cholera prevention intervention in Katanga and 

South Kivu provinces. 

 

Overview of non-RCRC actors in country: 

As of 16 December 2015, there has been no response made by other stakeholders. The Ministry of 

Humanitarian Action and National Solidarity in DRC convened a meeting, which was attended by the CR DRC, 

and a request was made to the National Society to support the public authorities with their response to the 

floods. Please note that additional consultation is required with other stakeholders including the public 

authorities, international non-governmental organizations (INGOs), and United Nations (UN) agencies to 

establish if they are intending to respond.  

 

Needs analysis, beneficiary selection, risk assessment and scenario planning 

 
Needs Analysis 

Based on the preliminary assessment, immediate needs of the affected population were identified including: 

emergency shelter, first aid, non-food items (NFIs) (blankets, kitchen sets, mats, mosquito nets, soap, hygiene 

kits (for women of childbearing age), environmental sanitation (clearing of pipes to enable water to flow more 

easily) and hygiene promotion.  In total, 10,560 people have been affected in the Debonhome, Kingabua 

Ndanu, Kingabua Pécheur and Salongo neighbourhoods of Kinshasa, of which 8,480 (1,696 families) have lost 

their homes in property. Please refer to “Table 1: Distribution of displaced population” below: 

 

  



 | 3 P a g e

 

Table 1: Distribution of displaced population (Source: CR DRC) 

 

Neighbourhood No. displaced 
families 

No. displaced 
people 

Kingabua Pécheur 600 3,000 

Kingabua Ndanu 256 1,280 

Salongo 460 2,300 

Debonhome 380 1,900 

Total 1,696 8,480 

 

A more detailed needs and gaps assessment is required to provide more substantive information on the extent 

of the situation and the response that is required by all actors, especially in areas of Kinshasa that have been 

affected by the floods but where information on the scale of the flooding is not available. 

 

Beneficiary Selection:   In total, the DREF operation 

expects to target an initial 500 families (2,500 people) 

in Kinshasa – approx. 30 per cent of the displaced 

population, which will be identified/selected based on 

their level of vulnerability, including displaced 

households (whose homes were destroyed), the 

chronically ill, elderly, female-headed households, 

lactating mothers and under-five children, pregnant 

women, and/or people with disabilities.. 

 

DRC RC will ensure that the DREF operation is aligned 

with the IFRC’s commitment to realize gender equality 

and diversity; by adapting beneficiary selection criteria 

those that targets (women headed-households, people 

with disabilities). Other aspects considered will include 

prevention of sexual violence and gender-based 

violence, and the protection of children.  

 

Risk Assessment:  
Since the rainy season is just beginning, it is possible if no action is taken to ensure that sanitation structures 

(e.g. drains and gutters) are not cleaned, and then flooding could extend beyond Kinshasa into other areas of 

the country, especially in flood prone areas such as Bukavu and Kongo town. As per the intention to conduct a 

more detailed needs and gaps assessment, it is possible that the DREF operation will be extended into new 

areas if required. As noted, the Processing Centre of the Water Distribution Authority serving Kinshasa was 

damaged, which has reduced the available safe water supply, which exposes the affected population to 

epidemics, specifically cholera, which has in recent years become widespread in countries in Central Africa 

including DRC. Given the large population in Kinshasa, it is essential that measures are taken to ensure that 

people have access to safe water supply (e.g. through the distribution of water treatment chemicals, and 

storage containers) as well take measures to manage potential outbreaks (e.g. through the distribution of ORS 

sachets).  

 

B. Operational strategy and plan 

 

Overall objective 

 

Immediate survival needs of the flood-affected population are met through the provision of essential emergency 

relief, shelter, health, water, and sanitation and hygiene promotion assistance, targeting a total of 2,500 people 

(500 families) in the Debonhome, Kingabua Ndanu, Kingabua Pécheur and Salongo neighbourhoods of 

Kinshasa, for a period of two months.  

Flooding in the DRC capital of  Kinshasa  
Photo CR DRC 



 | 4 P a g e

 

 

Proposed strategy 

 
The proposed strategy aims to support the CR DRC in assisting a total of 2,500 people (500 households) that 

are flood-affected with immediate relief, shelter, health, and water sanitation and hygiene promotion 

interventions, including: 

 

 Conduct a detailed needs and gaps assessment in consultation with relevant partners and beneficiaries, 

which will be focused on other areas of Kinshasa that have been affected by the floods, but where 

information on the scale of the flooding is not available. If required, the results of the assessment will lead 

to a revision to the Emergency Plan of Action for the DREF operation.  

 Replenishment of first aid kits (50) that have been used by volunteers in the initial response to the floods; 

and to enable first aid services to be provided to the affected population. 

 Procurement/distribution of insecticide treated long lasting mosquito nets (two pcs per family) to reduce the 

risk of malaria to the affected population. 

 Procurement/distribution of water treatment chemicals (aqua tabs) to enable household water treatment, 

as well as products for cholera treatment (oral rehydration sachets). Each family will receive sufficient aqua 

tabs to provide them with safe water supply for two months. 

 Procurement of environmental sanitation materials (Brushes, bleach, chlorine, detergent, hoes, mixing 

containers, rakes, soap, sprayers and wheel barrows) and protective equipment (boots, gloves, helmets, 

nose covers and protective suits), which will be issued to community sanitation committees (4 committees) 

that will be established in the areas of implementation. Please note that the community sanitation 

committees will then be responsible for cleaning the drains and gutters in their communities to help reduce 

the risk of waterborne disease. 

 Training of volunteers (30) and supervisors (five) on health and hygiene promotion, and use of IEC 

materials (three-day training). Following the training the volunteers and supervisors will be mobilized to 

carry out health and hygiene promotion outreach activities with the affected population for two-three days 

per week (depending on other activities planned, e.g. distributions) for eight weeks.  

 Procurement/distribution of hygiene related NFIs comprising buckets (one pc per family), hygiene/dignity 

kits (one pc per family), jerry cans (one pc per family) and soap (10 pcs per family); and provide 

sensitization on their use; as well as sensitization on their use. Please note that the buckets and jerry cans 

will enable the affected population to conserve water, the supply of which has been disrupted due to 

damage caused to water systems.  

 Training of volunteers (on use of shelter kit, and distribution techniques (Target: 30 volunteers + 5 

supervisors) (two days). Following the training the volunteers and supervisors will be mobilized to support 

the affected population with the construction of temporary shelters/repair of existing structures.  

 Procurement/distribution of NFIs and emergency shelter items comprising in accordance with IFRC 

procurement standards (Blankets (two pcs per family), kitchen sets (one pc per family), mats (two pcs per 

family), nails (100g per family), shelter kits – local specification based on consultation (one pc per family), 

tarpaulins (two pcs per family), slats (four pcs per family) and timber (four pcs per family). 

 

Operational support services 

 

Human resources 

 

For this DREF operation, the following human resources will be required: 

 

 Provincial coordinator (Kinshasa) will be designated to supervise the implementation of the DREF operation; 

and a contribution will be made to support his/her costs for a period of two months.  



 | 5 P a g e

 

 Head of operation will be recruited for two months to act as a focal point for the DREF operation.  

 A NHQ WatSan officer will be designated to support the implementation of the DREF operation (e.g. support 

with training etc.) for a period of 24 days ((three days per week for eight weeks). The NHQ WatSan officer 

will be issued with a per diem and an allowance for accommodation. 

 Four NDRT will be designated to support the implementation of the DREF operation (e.g. support with 

training etc.) a period of 24 days ((three days per week for eight weeks). Each NDRT will be issued with a 

per diem and an allowance for accommodation. 

 Five supervisors will be initially mobilized to support volunteers with the activities planned, for a period of 24 

days (three days per week for eight weeks). Each supervisor will receive a daily per diem. 

 30 volunteers will be initially mobilized to support the implementation of the DREF operation, for a period of 

24 days (three days per week for eight weeks). Each volunteer will receive a daily per diem, as well as a 

Red Cross rain bib and rain jacket. If the DREF operation is revised, it is expected that the number of 

volunteers required will be increased. Please note that volunteers involved in sanitation activities will also be 

issued with protective equipment (boots, gloves, helmets, protective suits, sanitiser etc.). 

 A CR DRC driver will be recruited for two months; and security personnel also hired for one month to ensure 

the safety and security of NFIs that are being stored.  

 An IFRC Regional Disaster Response Team (RDRT) team member (shelter profile) will be deployed for one 

month, and a RDRT team member (logistics) to support the CR DRC with the implementation of the DREF 

operation (e.g. support with training on the use of the shelter kit etc.). An IFRC driver will also be recruited 

for one month. Additional technical support will also be provided by the IFRC regional operations 

coordinator and finance assistant.  

 

Logistics and supply chain 

 

 Procurement plans: Local procurement of all items will be carried out with support from the IFRC Central 

Africa office due to the challenges in transporting items from Yaoundé, Cameroon to Kinshasa, DRC in 

terms of cost and timeliness. The IFRC Central Africa, Africa region and Global Logistics Service (in Dubai) 

will ensure office will ensure that the CR DRC is equipped with the relevant information on the procurement 

procedures; and the RDRT will be expected to support them to ensure compliance.   

 Transport and fleet needs: Vehicle fuel and maintenance costs have been budgeted; as well as 

transportation of the NFIs and shelter materials from the warehouse to the areas of implementation.  In 

addition, an IFRC vehicle will be leased for one month to support the RDRT. 

 Logistics and warehousing:  The RC DRC will rent warehouse space for a period of one month to storage 

the NFIs and shelter materials prior to distribution.  

 

Communications 

In collaboration with the IFRC Central Africa office, the CR DRC will ensure communication and visibility of the 

National Society operating in the affected areas. The CR DRC communications and public relations officer the 

general secretary of Kinshasa will be accompanied by five journalists, will support the collection of case studies 

of best practices, photographs, key messages, human interest stories, which will lead to the production of a 

documentary film as part of the show "30 Minutes of humanitarian action" on at least five television channels, as 

well as radio broadcasts.  

 

Security 

No security problems or access issues in the affected areas have identified. In addition, the Provincial 

Committee of the CR DRC has good relations with the political and administrative authorities of the place. 

 

 



 | 6 P a g e

 

Planning, monitoring, evaluation, and reporting (PMER) 

 

Continuous monitoring of the DREF operation will be carried out by the RC DRC with technical assistance 

provide by the IFRC Central Africa office. The IFRC Central Africa office will support the RC DRC in developing 

a monitoring plan with indicators to measure the progress and performance of the DREF operation through the 

PMER assistant; as well as if required the preparation of an Operations Update to revise the EPoA. The IFRC 

Central Africa regional operations coordinator will carry out a technical monitoring mission to support the 

effective implementation of the DREF operation, while the IFRC Central Africa finance assistant will support the 

closure (e.g. reconciliation of justifications for reporting). The CR DRC NHQ will also carry out monitoring visits 

(10 days in total). Regular reports on the implementation will be produced and shared with all relevant partners. 

 

Administration and finance 

A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) will be agreed between the IFRC Central Africa office and CR DRC, 

which will outline the parties’ responsibilities to implement the activities planned within the DREF operation, and 

ensure that the appropriate guidelines are complied with in terms of the use of DREF allocations. SLRCS has a 

permanent administrative and financial department, which will ensure the proper use of financial resources in 

accordance with conditions a MoU.  

C. DETAILED OPERATIONAL PLAN 

 

Quality programming / Areas common to all sectors 

  

Outcome 1: Continuous and detailed assessment and analysis is used to inform the design and implementation 
of the DREF operation 

Output 1.1: Rapid and detailed needs assessment are carried out to inform the preparation/revision of the 
Emergency Plan of Action; and continuous coordination with all stakeholders 

Activities planned                          Weeks 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

Carry out detailed assessment in consultation with relevant 
partners  

        

Revise Emergency Plan of Action based on analysis of 
assessment information 

        

Monitoring of the activities planned by NHQ 
 

        

Deployment of a Regional Disaster Response Team member  
 

        

 

Health and Care 

 
 

Outcome 1: Immediate risks to health are reduced through the provision of community based health services in 
flood-affected areas of Democratic Republic of Congo, over a period of two months 

Output 1.1: Target population provided with access to community based health services, including provision of 
first aid; and distribution of mosquito nets (Target:  2,500 people (500 families)) 

Activities planned                          Weeks 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

Procurement/replenishment of first aid kits (Target: 50 kits) 
 

        

Provide first aid services; and referral in flood-affected 
communities 

        

Procure/distribution of mosquito nets; and provide 
sensitization on their use  (Target: 500 families (2 pcs per 
family) 

        

 
 

 



 | 7 P a g e

 

Water, sanitation and hygiene promotion 

 

Outcome 1: Immediate risk of waterborne disease is reduced through the provision of improved water, 
sanitation and hygiene promotion in flood-affected areas of Democratic Republic of Congo, over a period of two 
months 

Output 1.1: Target population is provided with improved access to safe water supply (Target: 2,500 people (500 
families)  

Activities planned                          Weeks 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

Procure/distribute HH water treatment chemicals (aqua tab – 
two pcs per family for 60 days) including ORS; and provide 
training/demonstration on their use. 

        

Output 1.2: Target population is provided with adequate environmental sanitation measures  (Target:  2,500 
people (500 families)) 

Activities planned                          Weeks 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  8 

Procurement of environmental sanitation materials 
(Bleach, chlorine, containers (for mixing of chlorine, 
detergent, Hoes, soap, soft brushes, sprayers, rakes, 
wheelbarrows ) and protective equipment (boots, 
gloves, helmets, nose guards, protective suits) 

        

Establish community sanitation committees (Target: 
four committees -  one committee /district 

        

Conduct environmental sanitation campaigns          

Output 1.3: Target population is provided with hygiene promotion, which meets SPHERE standards (Target:  
2,500 people (500 families)) 

Activities planned                          Weeks 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

Training of volunteers on health and hygiene 
promotion and the use of IEC materials (Target: 30 
volunteers + 5 volunteer supervisors) 

        

Production of information, education and 
communication materials (Target: 5,000 posters, 
5,000 leaflets, and 10 image boxes) 

        

Conduct health and hygiene promotion through 
house to house approach (Target: 500 families)   

        

Procure/distribution of hygiene related NFIs 
comprising buckets (one pc per family), 
hygiene/dignity kits (one pc per family), jerry cans 
(one pc per family) and soap (10 pcs per family); 
and provide sensitization on their use (Target: 500 
families)  

        

 

Shelter and settlements 

 

Outcome 1: Immediate shelter and settlement needs of the target population in flood-affected areas of DRC are 
met over a period of two months 

Output 1.1: Target population is provided with Non-Food Items (NFIs) and emergency shelter items  (Target:  
2,500 people (500 families)) 

Activities planned                          Weeks 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

Through consultation process define the appropriate 
emergency shelter design and bill of quantity  

        

Procure/distribute NFIs and emergency shelter items in 
accordance with IFRC procurement standards (blankets 
(two pcs per family), kitchen sets (one pc per family), mats 
(two pcs per family),  nails (100g per family), local 
specification shelter kits - one tools kit and timber  (one pc 
per family), tarpaulins (two pcs per family), slats (four pcs 
per family) timber (four pcs per family) ( ( (Target: 500 
families) 

        

Training of volunteers on use of shelter tool kit, and         



 | 8 P a g e

 

distribution techniques (Target: 30 volunteers + 5 
supervisors) 

Mobilization of volunteers to provide 
demonstration/sensitization on temporary shelter 
construction (Target: 30 volunteers) 

        

Shelter project evaluation          

 

 

 

Contact information 

For further information specifically related to this operation please contact: 

 DRC Red Cross: M. Dominique Lutula Kitoko; Président of the DRC Red Cross; phone:(243) 
818801480;email: sgcrrdc@gmail.com 

 IFRC Regional Representation: Denis Duffaut, Regional Representative for Central Africa; 
Yaoundé; phone: (office) +237 22 21 74 37; (mobile) +237 77 11 77 97; fax: +237 22 21 74 39; 
email: denis.duffaut@ifrc.org 

 IFRC Africa Region: Farid Abdulkadir, Head of Disaster Management Unit, Nairobi, Kenya; 
phone +254 731 067 489 ; email: farid.aiywar@ifrc.org  

 IFRC Geneva: Christine South, Operations Quality Assurance Senior Officer; phone: 
+41.22.730.45 29; email: christine.south@ifrc.org 

 IFRC Africa Region: Rishi Ramrakha, Head of zone logistics unit; Tel:+254 733 888 022/ Fax 
+254 20 271 2777; email: rishi.ramrakha@ifrc.org 

For Resource Mobilization and Pledges: 

 IFRC West and Central Africa hub: Elisabeth Seck, Resource Mobilization Officer, Dakar; 
phone:+221 33 869 36 60; mobile: +221 77 450 59 49; email:  elisabeth.seck@ifrc.org  

For Performance and Accountability (planning, monitoring, evaluation and reporting): 

 IFRC Africa Zone: Robert Ondrusek, PMER Coordinator; Nairobi; phone:+254 731 067277; 
email: robert.ondrusek@ifrc.org 

 

__________________________________________________________________________ 

How we work 

 
All IFRC assistance seeks to adhere to the Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Movement and Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) in Disaster Relief and the Humanitarian Charter and 
Minimum Standards in Disaster Response (Sphere) in delivering assistance to the most vulnerable. 
 
The IFRC’s vision is to inspire, encourage, facilitate and promote at all times all forms of humanitarian activities 
by National Societies, with a view to preventing and alleviating human suffering, and thereby contributing to the 
maintenance and promotion of human dignity and peace in the world. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The IFRC’s work is guided by Strategy 2020 which puts forward three strategic aims: 

1. Save lives, protect livelihoods, and strengthen recovery from disaster and crises. 
2. Enable healthy and safe living. 
3. Promote social inclusion and a culture of non-violence and peace. 

mailto:sgcrrdc@gmail.com
mailto:denis.duffaut@ifrc.org
mailto:farid.aiywar@ifrc.org
mailto:christine.south@ifrc.org
mailto:rishi.ramrakha@ifrc.org
mailto:elisabeth.seck@ifrc.org
mailto:robert.ondrusek@ifrc.org


DRC Floods (MDRCD016) 19/12/2015

Budget Group

Shelter - Relief 64,000
Shelter - Transitional 0
Construction - Housing 0
Construction - Facilities 0
Construction - Materials 0
Clothing & Textiles 12,000
Food 0
Seeds & Plants 0
Water, Sanitation & Hygiene 29,789
Medical & First Aid 2,500
Teaching Materials 5,649
Utensils & Tools 14,900
Other Supplies & Services 0
Emergency Response Units 0
Cash Disbursements 0
Total RELIEF ITEMS, CONSTRUCTION AND SUPPLIES 128,838

Land & Buildings 0
Vehicles Purchase 0
Computer & Telecom Equipment 0
Office/Household  Furniture & Equipment 0
Medical Equipment 0
Other Machinery & Equipment 0
Total LAND, VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT 0

Storage, Warehousing 1,375
Distribution & Monitoring 950
Transport & Vehicle Costs 4,200
Logistics Services 0
Total LOGISTICS, TRANSPORT AND STORAGE 6,525

International Staff 12,000
National Staff 450
National Society Staff 9,912
Volunteers 6,360
Total PERSONNEL 28,722

Consultants 0
Professional Fees 0
Total CONSULTANTS & PROFESSIONAL FEES 0

Workshops & Training 5,515
Total WORKSHOP & TRAINING 5,515

Travel 6,457
Information & Public Relations 1,392
Office Costs 0
Communications 1,000
Financial Charges 1,500
Other General Expenses 0
Shared Support Services
Total GENERAL EXPENDITURES 10,349

Programme and Supplementary Services Recovery 11,697
Total INDIRECT COSTS 11,697

TOTAL BUDGET 191,646

Budget CHF


	MDRCD016_accepted.pdf
	MDRCD016 - Budget (ZFU Validated 17.12.15)

